THIS “O-P BOOK” IS AN AUTHORIZED REPRINT OF THE ORIGINAL EDITION,
PRODUCED BY MICROFILM-XEROX BY UNIVERSITY MICROFILMS, INC., ANN ARBOR,
MICHIGAN, 1961




                             WORKS ISSUED BY
                          The Hakluyt Society.

                            SIR FRANCIS DRAKE
                               HIS VOYAGE,
                                  1595.

                              M.DCCC.XLIX.




THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY.


President.

    SIR RODERICK IMPEY MURCHISON, G.C.St.S., F.R.S., Corr. Mem. Inst. Fr.,
      Hon. Mem. Imp. Acad. Sc. St. Petersburg, &c., &c.

Vice-Presidents.

    VICE-ADMIRAL SIR CHARLES MALCOLM, KT.
    THE REV. H. H. MILMAN, M.A.

Council.

    CHARLES T. BEKE, ESQ., PHIL. D., F.S.A.
    CAPT. C. R. D. BETHUNE, R.N., C.B.
    CAPT. F. P. BLACKWOOD, R.N.
    MAJ.-GEN. J. BRIGGS, F.R.S.
    BOLTON CORNEY, ESQ., M.R.S.L.
    SIR HENRY ELLIS, K.H., F.R.S.
    JOHN FORSTER, ESQ.
    J. E. GRAY, ESQ., F.R.S.
    JOHN WINTER JONES, ESQ.
    R. H. MAJOR, ESQ.
    R. MONCKTON MILNES, ESQ., M.P.
    CHARLES NEWTON, ESQ.
    REV. G. C. RENOUARD, M.A.
    W. B. RYE, ESQ.
    SIR ROBERT SCHOMBURGK.
    ANDREW SMITH, ESQ., M.D.
    SIR GEORGE T. STAUNTON, BART, M.P., F.R.S.

Honorary Secretary.

    WILLIAM DESBOROUGH COOLEY, F.R.G.S.

Bankers.

    MESSRS. BOUVERIE AND CO., 11, HAYMARKET.

THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY, which is established for the purpose of printing
rare or unpublished Voyages and Travels, aims at opening by this means
an easier access to the sources of a branch of knowledge, which yields
to none in importance, and is superior to most in agreeable variety.
The narratives of travellers and navigators make us acquainted with
the earth, its inhabitants and productions; they exhibit the growth of
intercourse among mankind, with its effects on civilization, and, while
instructing, they at the same time awaken attention, by recounting the
toils and adventures of those who first explored unknown and distant
regions.

The advantage of an Association of this kind, consists not merely in
its system of literary co-operation, but also in its economy. The
acquirements, taste, and discrimination of a number of individuals,
who feel an interest in the same pursuit, are thus brought to act in
voluntary combination, and the ordinary charges of publication are also
avoided, so that the volumes produced, are distributed among the Members
(who can alone obtain them) at little more than the cost of printing and
paper. The Society expends nearly the whole of its funds in printing
works for the Members; and since the cost of each copy varies inversely
as the whole number of copies printed, it is obvious that the Members are
gainers individually by the prosperity of the Society, and the consequent
vigour of its operations.

The Members are requested to bear in mind that the power of the Council
to make advantageous arrangements, will depend, in a great measure, on
the prompt payment of the subscriptions, which are payable in advance on
the 1st January, and are received by

_The Secretary, WILLIAM DESBOROUGH COOLEY, 33, King-street, Bloomsbury;
or at the LONDON LIBRARY, 12, St. James’s-square; and by T. RODD, 9,
Great Newport-street, Leicester-square, who is the Society’s Agent for
the delivery of its volumes._


Already Published.

The Observations of Sir Richard Hawkins, KNT.

    In his Voyage into the South Sea in 1593. Reprinted from the
    edition of 1622, and edited by Capt. C. R. DRINKWATER BETHUNE,
    R.N., C.B.

SELECT LETTERS OF COLUMBUS,

    With Original Documents relating to the DISCOVERY OF THE NEW
    WORLD. Translated and Edited by R. H. MAJOR, Esq.

THE DISCOVERIE OF THE EMPIRE OF GUIANA,

    By SIR WALTER RALEGH, KNT. Edited, with Copious Explanatory
    Notes, and a Biographical Memoir, by SIR ROBERT H. SCHOMBURGK,
    Phil. D., &c.

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE HIS VOYAGE, 1595,

    By THOMAS MAYNARDE, together with the Spanish Account of
    Drake’s Attack on Puerto Rico, edited from the Original MSS. by
    W. D. COOLEY.


Works in Progress.

Narratives of Voyages made for the Discovery of a Passage by the
Northwest to Cathaia and India, from A.D. 1490 to A.D. 1631, with
Illustrations from unpublished MSS. by THOMAS RUNDALL.

Rerum Moscoviticarum Commentarii. The earliest Account of Russia, by
Sigismund von Herberstein, to be translated from the rare editions of
1549 and 1556, by R. H. MAJOR, Esq.

The East India Voyage of Sir Henry Middleton, in 1604-5. From the rare
edition of 1606, edited by BOLTON CORNEY, Esq.


Works Suggested to the Council for Publication.

TRADESCANT THE ELDER IN RUSSIA, 1618.—A Review of the early Voyages
in the North, and of the origin of the Commercial Intercourse between
England and Russia, by DR. J. HAMEL, 1847, to be translated from the
German.

CARPINI AND RUBRUQUIS.—The Travels of John de Plano Carpini, and of
Guillaume de Rubruquis, to the Great Khan of Tartary, in 1245 and 1253
respectively. Translated from the text published by the Société de
Géographie of Paris.

FRESCOBALDI.—The Travels of Frescobaldi in Egypt and Syria, in 1384.
Translated from the Italian text as edited by Manzi.

BÉTHENCOURT.—A History of the Discovery and Conquest of the Canary
Islands, made by Jean de Béthencourt, in 1402-25. From the French
Narrative of his Chaplains, Pierre Bontier and Jean le Verrier.

CA DA MOSTO.—The Voyages of Ca da Mosto along the Western Coast of
Africa, in 1454. Translated from the Italian text of 1507.

VARTHEMA.—The Travels of Ludovico de Varthema, in Egypt, Syria, Arabia,
Persia, India, and Ethiopia, in 1503-8. Translated from the Italian text
of 1510.

DRAKE.—The _world encompassed_ by Sir Francis Drake, 1577-80. Written by
Francis Fletcher, preacher, &c. Collated with a MS.

HAKLUYT.—Divers Voyages touching the Discovery of America and the Islands
adjacent to the same. From the rare edition of 1582.

VIRGINIA.—Virginia in the years 1584-1600; comprising the Narratives of
Arthur Barlowe, Ralf Lane, Thomas Harriot, &c.

RUSSIA.—Of the Russe Commonwealth. By Giles Fletcher, D.C.L. From the
suppressed edition of 1591.

CADIZ.—A Brief and True Report of the Honourable Voyage to Cadiz, 1596.
From the suppressed edition of 1598, with additions.

TRESWELL.—The journey of the Earl of Nottingham to Spain, in 1604. By R.
Treswell, Somerset Herald, with additions.

SOFALAH.—The History of Eastern Ethiopia, by J. dos Santos, 1607.
Translated, with Notes.

COLONIZATION.—Pamphlets on Colonization. By Sir William Alexander
(afterwards Earl of Sterline), and James Hagthorpe.


Laws of the Hakluyt Society.

I. The object of this Society shall be to print, for distribution among
its members, rare and valuable Voyages, Travels, Naval Expeditions, and
other geographical records, from an early period to the beginning of the
eighteenth century.

II. The Annual Subscription shall be One Guinea, payable in advance on
the 1st January; but Subscribers shall be at liberty to compound at any
time for future years by the payment of ten guineas, and they shall incur
no further liability.

III. Each member of the Society, having paid his subscription, shall be
entitled to a copy of every work produced by the Society, and to vote
at the general meetings within the period subscribed for; and if he do
not signify, before the close of a year, his wish to resign, he shall be
considered as a member for the succeeding year.

IV. The management of the Society’s affairs shall be vested in a
Council consisting of twenty-one members, namely, a President, two
Vice-Presidents, a Secretary, and seventeen ordinary members, to be
elected annually; but vacancies occurring between the general meetings
shall be filled up by the Council.

V. A General Meeting of the Subscribers shall be held annually, on
the first Thursday in March, when two gentlemen shall be appointed to
audit the Society’s accounts. The Secretary’s Report on the condition
and proceedings of the Society shall be then read, and, along with the
Auditor’s Report, be submitted for approval; and finally, the Meeting
shall proceed to elect the Council for the ensuing year.

VI. At each Annual Election six of the old Council shall retire; and a
list of the proposed new Council shall be printed for the subscribers
previous to the general meeting.

VII. The Council shall meet ordinarily on the 3rd Tuesday in every month,
excepting August, September and October, for the despatch of business,
three forming a quorum, and the Chairman having a casting vote.

VIII. Gentlemen preparing and editing works for the Society shall receive
twenty-five copies of such works respectively.

IX. The number of copies printed of the Society’s productions shall not
exceed the estimated number of Subscribers; so that after the second
year, when the Society may be supposed to have reached its full growth,
there shall be no extra copies.

X. The Society shall appoint Local Secretaries throughout the kingdom,
empowered to enrol members, transmit subscriptions, and otherwise
forward the Society’s interests; and it shall make such arrangements
with its correspondents in the chief provincial towns as will insure to
Subscribers residing in the country the regular delivery of their volumes
at moderate charges.


Rules for the Delivery of the Society’s Volumes.

I. The Society’s productions will be delivered without any charge, within
three miles of the General Post Office.

II. They will be forwarded to any place beyond that limit, the Society
paying the cost of booking, but not of carriage; nor will it be
answerable in this case for any loss or damage.

III. They will be delivered by the Society’s agent, T. Rodd, Great
Newport-street, to persons having the written authority of subscribers to
receive them.

IV. They will be sent to the Society’s correspondents or agents in the
principal towns throughout the kingdom; and care shall be taken that the
charge for carriage be as moderate as possible.




List of Members

OF

THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY.


  Adam, Admiral, Sir C., Greenwich Hospital
  Allen, William, Esq., Shifnall
  Allport, Franklin, Esq., 21, Brunswick-place, Cold Harbour-lane
  Arrowsmith, Mr. John, 10, Soho Square
  Asher, Mr. A., Berlin
  Atkinson, F. R., Esq., Manchester
  Baillie, David, Esq., 14, Belgrave Square
  Baker, William, Esq., Junior, 3, Crosby Square
  Banks, W., Esq., 12, Melina Place, Grove Road
  Barrow, John, Esq., 7, New Street, Spring Gardens
  Beatty, James, Esq., C.E., Southampton
  Beaufort, Rear-Admiral Sir Francis, Hydrographical Office, Admiralty
  Becher, Captain, R. N., 29, Upper Gloucester Place
  Beck, Dr., New York State Library, Albany
  Beke, C. T., Esq., Phil. D., 34, Cumming Street, Pentonville
  Belcher, Captain Sir Edward, R.N.
  Bell, Reverend Thomas, Berbice
  Bell, William, Esq., Church Place, Clapham
  Bennett, J. Joseph, Esq., F.L.S., British Museum
  Bennett, Joseph, Esq., 20, South Parade, St. James’s Park
  Berlin, The Royal Library of
  Betencourt, Alonzo, Philadelphia
  Bethune, Captain C. R. Drinkwater, R.N., Admiralty
  Blackwood, Captain Fr. P., R.N., United Service Club
  Blain, Delabere Robertson, Esq., 24, Beaufoy Ter., Maida Vale
  Blount, —, Esq.
  Blundell, W. C., 34, Cursitor Street
  Bombay Geographical Society
  Booth, B. W., Esq., Manchester
  Boston Athenæum, The
  Briggs, Major General J., 24, Conduit Street, Bond Street
  Brown, J., Esq., Newcastle Place, Clerkenwell
  Bruce, John, Esq., F.S.A., Hyde House, Stroud
  Bullock, Captain Frederick, R.N., Woolwich
  Bunney, William, Esq., Hull
  Brown, John Carter, Esq., Providence, Rhode Island
  Campbell, R. H. S., Esq., 5, Argyle Place, Regent’s Street
  Carmichael, Sir James, Bart., Sussex Gardens
  Carpenter, Charles, Esq., 45, Brunswick Square, Brighton
  Chabot, Philip J., Esq., M.A., F.R.A.S., Spitalfields
  Chapman, Captain, R. A., Athenæum
  Chapman, William, Esq., Richmond
  Churchill, Joseph, Esq.
  Clarke, Thomas, Esq., Ordnance
  Coghill, Rear-Admiral Sir Josiah, Bart.
  Collier, John Payne, Esq., F.S.A., Madeley Villas, Kensington
  Congress, Library of the, United States
  Cooley, W. D., Esq., 33, King Street, Bloomsbury
  Corney, Bolton, Esq., M.R.S.L., Barnes Terrace
  Cox, Edward William, Esq., 3, Crown Office Row, Temple
  Cranstoun, George, Esq., Corehouse, Lanark
  Cree, David, Esq., 23, Bush Lane
  Croker, T. Crofton, Esq., Admiralty
  Cunningham, Peter, Esq., 2, Madeley Villas, Kensington
  Chichester, J. R., Esq., 49, Wimpole Street
  Daniel, G., Esq., F.L.S., St. John’s Wood
  De la Beche, Sir Henry, K.H., 5 and 6, Craig’s Court, Charing Cross
  Dennett, W. H., Esq., Boston, United States
  Dickens, Charles, Esq., 1, Devonshire Terrace, Marylebone
  Dilke, C. Wentworth, Esq., 76, Sloane Street
  Dillon, Rear Admiral Sir W. H., Heath Lodge, Hanwell
  Doubleday, Edward, Esq., F.L.S., British Museum
  East India House
  Ellesmere, the Earl of, 18, Belgrave Square
  Elliot, J. B., Esq., Patna
  Ellis, Sir Henry K.H., F.R.S., &c., British Museum
  Elphinstone, John F., Esq., 23, York Terrace, Regent’s Park
  Enderby, Charles, Esq., East Greenwich
  Falconer, Dr.
  Fennell, James Hamilton, Esq., 4, Devereux Court, Temple
  Fergusson, James, Esq., 20, Langham Place
  Forster, John, Esq., 58, Lincoln’s Inn Fields
  Fox, General, Notting Hill
  Furlonger, Charles John, Esq., Craven Hill, Bayswater
  Force, Colonel Peter, Washington, United States
  Gibraltar Garrison Library
  Gilbertson, Edward, Esq., 20, Cranbourne Street, Leicester Square
  Gladdish, William, Esq., Gravesend
  Gray, J. E., Esq., F.R.S., British Museum
  Greenwich Hospital, the Officers’ Library
  Greenwich Society, for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge
  Gray, R. W., Esq., 47, Belgrave Square
  Guild, G. F., Esq.
  Guise, W. V., Esq., Elmore Court, Gloucester
  Halliday, William, Esq., 14, Donegall Place, Belfast
  Hamilton, W. R., Esq., F.R.S.L., &c., 12, Bolton Row
  Hammill, Miss Ellen, Liverpool
  Harrison, Thomas, Esq., 36, Alpha Road, Regent’s Park
  Harvey, W. Brotherton, Esq., Salford, Manchester
  Hawkins, Edward, Esq., British Museum
  Heath, Edward, Esq., Liverpool
  Henderson, Dr., 25, Curzon Street, Mayfair
  Henslow, Lieutenant Frederick, Windsor
  Herschel, Sir John, Bart., F.R.S., &c., Collingwood, Hawkhurst
  Hertford Literary and Scientific Institution
  Hodgkin, Thomas, Esq., M.D., 9, Brook Street, Grosvenor Sq.
  Hollond, Robert, Esq., M.P., Portland Place
  Holman, Lieutenant, R.N.
  Holmes, James, Esq., 4, New Ormond Street, Foundling
  Holt, G., Esq., Liverpool
  Hull Subscription Library
  Irvine, James, Esq., Liverpool
  Jackson, Henry, Esq., Sheffield
  Johnson, P., Esq., 57, Lincoln’s Inn Fields
  Jones, Robert, Esq., Liverpool
  Jones, Miss Susan, Liverpool
  Jukes, J. B., Esq., 5, Craig’s Court, Charing Cross
  Kenyon, J., Esq., 40, York Terrace, Regent’s Park
  Kesteven, W. B., 1, Manor Road, Holloway
  Laire, Fr. J., Esq., H.M. Dockyard, Chatham
  Latham, R. G., Esq., M.D., 20, Upper Southwick Street, Hyde Park Square
  Le Mesurier, R. Arthur, Esq., Corpus Christi College, Oxford
  Lemon, Sir C., Bt., M.P., 46, Charles Street, Berkeley Square
  Lennox, James, Esq., New York
  Lloyd, James D., Esq., 6, Grove Terrace, Camberwell
  Loftus, William Kennett, Esq., Newcastle-upon-Tyne
  London Institution, Finsbury Circus
  London Library, 12, St. James’s Square
  Ludlow, J. Malcolm, Esq., 69, Chancery Lane
  Logan, J. R., Esq.
  M’Grigor, Sir James, Bart., M.D., 6, Harley Street
  Mackenzie, John W., Esq., Edinburgh
  Mackenzie, C. A., Esq., Hyde Park Place, West
  Mackinnon, A. W., Esq., M.P., 4, Hyde Park Place
  Macready, W. C., Esq., 6, Clarence Terrace, Regent’s Park
  Major, R. H., Esq., British Museum
  Malcolm, Vice Admiral Sir Charles, 16, Pall Mall
  Malcolm, Mr. G. J., R.N.
  Malcolm, W. Elphinstone, Esq., Burnfoot
  Manchester Athenæum, The
  Marshall, Captain Sir John, R.N., Ruabon
  Marsham, Robert, Esq., Stratton Strawless, Norwich
  Martin, the Rev. J., Keston, Kent
  Massie, Captain T. L., R.N., Chester
  Mather, Edward, Esq., Newcastle-on-Tyne
  Meek, James, Esq., 14, Somerset Place
  Miland, John, Esq., 35, Chapel Street, Belgrave Square
  Milman, the Rev. H. H., M.A., Cloisters, Westminster
  Milnes, R. Monckton, Esq., M.P., 26, Pall Mall
  Morley, G., Esq., 15, Serle Street, Lincoln’s Inn Fields
  Murchison, Sir Roderick Impey, F.R.S., &c., 16, Belgrave Sq.
  Murphy, H. Esq., Brooklyn, New York
  Murray, John, Esq., Albemarle Street
  Murray, William, Esq., 2, John Street, Berkeley Square
  Murton, George, Esq., Manchester
  Nebyam, J. Moore, M.D., 16, Leeson Street, Dublin
  Newcastle-upon-Tyne Literary and Scientific Institute
  Newton, Charles, Esq., British Museum
  Nimmo, Thomas, Esq., Demerara
  Northampton, the Marquis of, President of the Royal Society, Piccadilly
  Parker, J. W., Esq., West Strand
  Pasley, Major General Sir C. W., K.C.B., 12, Norfolk Crescent, Hyde Park
  Pemberton, Mrs., 37, Eaton Place
  Petit, Louis Hayes, Esq., F.R.S., 9, New Square, Lincoln’s Inn
  Pollington, the Viscount, M.P., 2, Bolton Row
  Porter, G. W., Esq., British Museum
  Porter, Thomas, Esq., Manchester
  Porteus, John, Esq., Manchester
  Portsmouth, the Royal Naval College
  Pourtales, Count Albert, Berlin
  Prescott, Rear Admiral H., Portsmouth Dockyard
  Pringle, William, Esq., 3, King’s Road
  Proctor, B. W., Esq., 14, Upper Harley Street, Cavendish Sq.
  Rawdon, Christopher, Esq., Everton, Liverpool
  Read, F. J., Esq., Friday Street, Cheapside
  Read, William, Esq., Rathmines, Dublin
  Renouard, Rev. G. Cecil, Swanscombe, Dartford
  Rhodes, Richard, Esq., 9, Circus, Greenwich
  Rich, O., Esq., 12, Red Lion Square
  Richards, Mr., 100, St. Martin’s Lane
  Richardson, Sir John, M.D., F.R.S. Haslar, Gosport
  Ritter, Professor Karl, Berlin
  Rye, Arthur B., Esq., Banbury
  Rye, W. B., Esq., British Museum
  Rendell, J., Esq., 8, Great George Street
  Rundall, Thos., Esq.
  Schomburgk, Sir Robert, Surbiton
  Shadwell, the Right Hon. Sir Lancelot, Vice-Chancellor of England,
    Barnes Elms
  Simmonds, the Rev. J. D., M.A., Gosport
  Simpson, Lieut.
  Simpkinson, Sir Francis, Knt., 21, Bedford Place
  Singapore Library
  Smith, Andrew, Esq., M.D., 7, Pelham Crescent, Brompton
  Smith, Edmund, Esq., Hull
  Smith, G., Esq., 29, Finsbury Square
  Smith, G., Esq., Hague Terrace, Kingstown, Dublin
  Smith, J., Esq., Bombay
  Smith, J., Esq., Alscot Place, Grange Road, Bermondsey
  Smith, J. P. G., Esq., Everton, Liverpool
  Sotheby, S. Leigh, Esq., Forest Hill, Sydenham
  Spottiswoode, Andrew, Esq., New Street Square
  Staunton, Sir G. T., Bart., F.R.S., M.P., 16, Devonshire Street,
    Portland Place
  Stevens, Henry, Esq., Boston, United States
  Swan, the Rev. R. C., Hothfield, Kent
  Sykes, Admiral, 51, Wilton Terrace
  Taylor, R., Esq., Red Lion Court, Fleet Street
  Taylor, T., Esq., F.T.C.C., 6, Michael’s Grove, Brompton
  Ternaux Compans, Mons. H., Paris
  Thomas, E., Esq., 25, Hanover Square
  Thomas, W. A., 50, Threadneedle Street
  Thompson, J., Esq., 19, Lincoln’s Inn Fields
  Todd, R. B., Esq., M.D., F.R.S., 3, New Street, Spring Gardens
  Tonna, L. H. J., Esq., United Service Institution, Scotland Yard
  Turnbull, W. B. D. D., Esq., F.S.A., L. & E., Edinburgh
  Turner, Dawson, Esq., F.R.S., North Yarmouth
  Vidal, Captain, R. N.
  Vienna, Imperial Library
  Waite, Henry, Esq., Church Street, Stoke Newington
  Walker, John, Esq., 47, Bernard Street, Russell Square
  Washington, Captain J., R.N., 3, Oxford Square
  Webb, John, Esq., 1, Lawrence Pounteney Hill
  Weir, William, Esq., Regent Square
  White, the Rev. James, Bonchurch, Isle of Wight
  Whiteman, J. C., Esq., East India House
  Wilkinson, John, Esq., 3, Wellington Street, Strand
  Williams, Robert, Esq., 13, Elm Tree Road
  Willson, the Rev. J., 1, Raymond’s Buildings, Gray’s Inn
  Woodd, Basil T., Esq., 108, New Bond Street
  Wright, H., Esq., Cheltenham

RICHARDS, PRINTER, 100, ST. MARTIN’S LANE.




                            SIR FRANCIS DRAKE
                               HIS VOYAGE,
                                  1595,

                                   By
                            THOMAS MAYNARDE,

                            TOGETHER WITH THE
            SPANISH ACCOUNT OF DRAKE’S ATTACK ON PUERTO RICO.

                 EDITED, FROM THE ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPTS,
                                   BY
                              W. D. COOLEY.

                                 LONDON:
                    PRINTED FOR THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY.
                              M.DCCC.XLIX.

                    RICHARDS, 100, ST. MARTINS LANE.




THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY.


Council.

    SIR RODERICK IMPEY MURCHISON, G.C.St.S., F.R.S., Corr. Mem. Inst. Fr.;
      Hon. Mem. Imp. Acad. Sc. St. Petersburg, &c. &c., PRESIDENT.

    VICE-ADMIRAL SIR CHARLES MALCOLM, Kt. } VICE-PRESIDENTS.
    THE REV. H. H. MILMAN, M.A.           }
    CHARLES T. BEKE, ESQ., PHIL. D., F.S.A.
    CAPTAIN C. R. DRINKWATER BETHUNE, R.N., C.B.
    CAPTAIN F. P. BLACKWOOD, R.N.
    MAJOR-GENERAL J. BRIGGS, F.R.S.
    BOLTON CORNEY, ESQ., M.R.S.L.
    SIR HENRY ELLIS, K. H., F.R.S.
    JOHN FORSTER, ESQ.
    J. E. GRAY, ESQ., F.R.S.
    JOHN WINTER JONES, ESQ.
    R. H. MAJOR, ESQ.
    R. MONCKTON MILNES, ESQ., M.P.
    CHARLES NEWTON, ESQ.
    REVEREND G. C. RENOUARD.
    W. G. RYE, ESQ.
    SIR ROBERT SCHOMBURGK.
    ANDREW SMITH, ESQ., M.D.
    SIR GEORGE T. STAUNTON, BART., M.P., F.R.S.

    WILLIAM DESBOROUGH COOLEY, ESQ., F.R.G.S., SECRETARY.




PREFACE.


The name of SIR FRANCIS DRAKE is one of the brightest ornaments of
HAKLUYT’s collection; and a Society, which undertakes to continue and
complete the labours of the latter, cannot certainly be better employed
than in publishing documents illustrating the life and achievements of
that distinguished seaman.

In conformity with this view, the two original pieces which follow have
been selected for publication; both brief but full of life, and the first
of them, in particular, very racy and characteristic.

The value of Maynarde’s paper (additional MSS., No. 5209, in the library
of the British Museum), lies in the writer’s intimacy with Sir Francis
Drake, whom he accompanied in the unfortunate expedition which is the
subject of the following narrative, and in the shrewdness of his remarks,
clothed occasionally in the quaintest language. It cannot be denied that
it tends to dispel much of the romance which has hitherto coloured so
brilliantly the history of the naval hero. But truth is thereby a gainer.
Romance elevates the hero at the expense of human nature, and sacrifices
the many for the glory of one. It may not be without advantage to learn,
from the example of one so justly celebrated as Drake, what sordid
motives may be cloaked under the pretence of national glory, and how
mistrustfully we ought to listen to the professedly generous instigators
of war and rapine.

The Spanish paper, Relacion de lo Sucedido, etc., (additional MSS. No.
13,964, British Museum), which has the form of an official report, or
dispatch, is extremely interesting, inasmuch as it allows us to see, in
immediate juxtaposition and direct contrast, the accounts of the affair
at Puerto Rico, as given by the two belligerent parties.

These papers are here reproduced from the originals without change or
emendation; so that their defects, whether attributable to negligence or
ignorance, may be taken into consideration in estimating their intrinsic
worth.

The superficial inaccuracies of Maynarde’s paper are not a few; his
constant misspelling of proper names, as Corasaw for Curaçoa, St. Tomarta
for Sta. Martha, would seem to prove him illiterate. It is still more
important, that, through oversight and omission, he states the number
of the forces, who marched from Nombre de Dios to attack Panama, to be
fifty, instead of seven hundred and fifty.

It is amusing to observe the variance between the Spanish and English
accounts of the same action, both written in good faith. The Spaniards
had but seventy guns, and yet the English reckoned 5160 pieces of
artillery playing on them. This tremendous fire would appear from the
English account to have done no great harm, while the Spaniards allege
that they killed four hundred of the enemy, besides wounding many more.

But this is not the place for a critical examination of the following
pages. The conflicting statements and opinions respecting the closing
scene of Drake’s eventful life, are amply detailed in Mr. Barrow’s
justly popular volume. Here it will be sufficient to observe that
Maynarde’s keen and natural comments on his commanders, proceed from one
who, in regard to Drake, certainly writes in a friendly spirit, and from
whom the truth was wrung by the circumstances of his situation.

                                                                 W. D. C.




                            SIR FRANCIS DRAKE
                               HIS VOYAGE,
                                  1595:

                                   BY
                            THOMAS MAYNARDE.




SIR FRANCIS DRAKE HIS VOYAGE, 1595.


It appears by the attempts and knowen purposes of the Spaniarde, as by
his greedy desire to bee our neighboure in Bretaine, his fortifienge upon
the river of Brest, to gaine so near us a quiet and safe rode for his
fleet, his carelessness in losinge the strongehouldes and townes which
he possessed in the Lowe Countries, not followinge those warres in that
heate which he wonted, the rebellious rysinge of the Earle of Tyrone
(wrought or drawen thereto undoubtedly by his wicked practises), that
hee leaveth no means unattempted which he judged might bee a furtherance
to turne our tranquillitie into accursed thraldom; so robbinge us of
that quiet peace which wee, from the hands of Her Majestie (next under
God), aboundently enjoy. This his bloodthirstie desire foreseene by the
wisdome of our queene and counsayle, they helde no better meanes to curbe
his unjust pretenses, than by sendinge forces to invade him in that
kingdome from whence hee hath feathers to flye to the toppe of his high
desires; they knowing that if for two or three yeeres a blowe were given
him there, that might hinder the coming into Spaine of his treasure;
his povertie, by reason of his daily huge payments, would be so great,
and his men of warre, most of them mercenaries, that assuredly would
fall from him, so woulde he have more neede of meanes to keepe his owne
territories, than he nowe hath of superfluitie to thruste into others
rights.

This invasion was spoken of in June 1594, a longe time before it was put
in execution; and it beinge partly resolved on, Sir Francis Drake was
named generall in November folowinge:—a man of greate spirit and fitt to
undertake matters: in my poore opinion, better able to conduct forces and
discreetly to governe in conductinge them to places where service was to
be done, than to comande in the execution thereof. But, assuredly, his
very name was a great terror to the enemie in all those partes, havinge
heretofore done many thinges in those countries to his honorable fame
and profitt. But entringe into them as the childe of fortune, it may be
his selfe-willed and peremptorie comand was doubted, and that caused
Her Majestie, as should seeme, to joyne Sir John Hawkins in equall
commission:—a man oulde and warie, entering into matters with so laden a
foote, that the other’s meat woulde be eaten before his spit could come
to the fire: men of so different natures and dispositions, that what the
one desireth the other would commonly oppose against; and though their
warie cariages sequestred it from meaner wittes, yet was it apparently
seen to better judgements before our going from Plymouth, that whom the
one loved, the other smaly esteemed. Agreeing best, for what I could
conjecture, in giving out a glorious title to their intended jorneye,
and in not so well victualinge the navie as, I deeme, was Her Majestie’s
pleasure it shoulde bee, both of them served them to goode purpose, for,
from this havinge the distributinge of so great sommes, their miserable
providinge for us would free them from incurringe any greate losse,
whatsoever befel of the jorney. And the former drewe unto them so greate
repaire of voluntaries[1] that they had choice to discharge suche fewe as
they had pressed, and to enforce the staye of others who gladly would
be partakers of their voyage. But notwithstandinge matters were very
forward, and that they had drawen together three thousand men, and had
ready furnished twenty-seven shippes, whereof six were Her Majestie’s,
yet many times was it very doubtfull whether the jorney should proceed;
and had not the newes of a gallion of the King of Spaine, which was
driven into St. John de Porterico with two millions and a halfe of
tresure, come unto them by the reporte of certaine prisoners, whereof
they advertised Her Majestie, it is very likely it had been broken; but
Her Majestie, persuaded by them of the easie takinge therof, comanded
them to haste their departure.

So on Thursday, being the 28th of August, in the year 1595, havinge
stayed two moneth in Plimouth, we went thence twenty-seven sail, and
were two thousand five hundred men of all sortes. This fleet was devided
into two squadrons; not that it was so appointed by Her Majestie, for
from her was granted as powerfull authoritie unto eyther of them over
the whole as any parte, but Sir Francis victualinge the one halfe and
Sir John the other, it made them, as men afectinge what they had done,
to chalenge a greater prerogative over them than the whole; wherin they
wronged themselves and the action, for wee had not runne sixty or seventy
leagues in our course, before a flagge of councell was put out in the
Garlande, unto which all commanders with the chiefe masters and gentlemen
repayred. Sir Francis complayned that he had a three hundred men more in
his squadron then were in the other, and that he was much pestered in
his owne shipp, wherof he would gladly be eased. Sir John gave no other
hearinge to this motion, but seemed to dislike that he should bring more
than was concluded betwixt them, and this drewe them to some cholericke
speeches. But Sir John would not receave any unles he were entreated:
to this Sir Francis’ stout hearte could never be driven. This was on
the second of September, and after they were somwhat qualified, they
acquainted us that Sir Thomas Baskerville, our coronell generall, was
of theyr counsayle by vertue of the broade seale, and that they would
take unto them Sir Nicholas Clifforde and the other captains appointed
by Her Majestie, who were, eleven for the land, four for the shippes in
which they themselves went not. They gave us instructions for directinge
our course, if, by foule weather or mischange, any should be severed,
and orders what alowances we should put our men into for preservation
of victualls, with other necessary instructions. In the end, Sir John
revealed the places whither wee were bound, in hearinge of the basest
mariner; observinge therin no warlike or provident advice, nor was it
ever amended to the time of theyr deaths, but so he named St. John de
Porterico, where the treasure before spoken of was to be taken, even
withoute blowes, from whence we should go direct to Nombre de Dios, and
so over land to Panama. What other things should fall out by the way, he
esteemed them not worth the naminge, this being sufficient to make a far
greater armie rich to theyr content.

Some seven or eight days after this, we were called aborde the Defiance,
where, Sir Francis Drake propoundinge unto us whether we should give upon
the Canaries or Maderas (for he was resolved to put for one of them by
the way), we seeinge his bent and the earnestnes of the coronel generall,
together with the apparent likelihood of profit, might soon have bin
drawen therto; but consideringe the weightie matters we had undertaken
and how needfull it was to hasten us thether [we did not immediately
assent]. But General Hawkins utterly mislikinge this motion, it beinge
a matter, as hee saide, never before thought of, [he declared he] knewe
no cause why the fleete should staye in any place till they came to the
Indies, unles it should be by his takinge in of so greate numbers to
consume his waters and other provision; the which, if Sir Francis would
acknowledge, hee would ridde him and relieve him the best hee could. Now
the fyer which laye hid in theyr stomacks began to breake forth, and had
not the coronell pacified them, it would have growen farther; but theyr
heat somwhat abated, and they concluded to dine next day aboarde the
Garlande with Sir John, when it was resolved that we should put for the
Grand Canaries, though, in my conscience, whatsoever his tonge saide, Sir
John’s harte was againste.

These matters were well qualified, and for that place we shaped our
course, in which we met with a small flemminge bounde for the Streights
and a small manne of warre of Waymouth, who kept us companie to the
Canaries. On Wensday, the twenty-fourth day, we had sight of Lancerotta
and Forteventura. The twenty-fifth at night we descried the Canaries,
it beinge a monthe after our departure from Plymouth. On Friday, beinge
the twenty-sixth, we came to anchor, some saker shott from a forte which
stands to the west norwest of the harboure. Sir Francis spent much time
in seekinge out the fittest place to land; the enemie therby gaininge
time to drawe theyr forces in rediness to impeach our approach. At length
we puttinge for the shore in our boats and pinnaces, found a great seege
and such power of men to encounter us, that it was then thought it would
hazarde the whole action if we should give further upon it, wherupon
we returned without recevinge or doinge any harme worthy the writinge;
but, undoubtedly, had we lanced under the forte at our first cominge to
anchor, wee had put fayre to bee possessors of the towne, for the delayes
gave the enemie greate stomackes and daunted our owne; and it beinge the
first service our new men were brought into, it was to be doubted they
would prove the worse the whole jorney followinge.

We presently wayed hence and came to anchor the twenty-seventh at the
west south west part of this islande, where wee watered. Here Captaine
Grimstone, one of the twelve captaines for lande, was slaine by
the mountainors, with his boy and a surgeon. Hence wee departed the
twenty-eighth, houldinge our course south-west three weeks, then we
ran west south west and west and by south till the twenty-seventh of
October, on which day we had sight of Maten, an island lying south-est
from Dominica. Our generalls ment to water at Guadalupe, for Dominica
beinge inhabited by Indians, our men straglinge soon would have their
throates cutte. Generall Drake lyinge ahead the fleet, ran in by the
mouth of Dominica, Sir John by south. The twenty-ninth we anchored under
Guadalupe; Sir Francis beinge there a daye before us. On the thirtieth,
Josias, captaine of the Delight, brought newes to the generalls, that the
Francis, a small shippe of companie, was taken by nine frigotts, wherupon
Sir Francis would presently have folowed them either with the whole
fleete or some parte, for that he knew our intentions were discovered
by reason they were so openly made knowne, as I afore have set downe,
by Sir John Hawkins. Sir John would in no wise agree to eyther of these
motions, and he was assisted in his opinion by Sir Nicholas Clifforde,
all others furtheringe his desires, which might be a means to staye them
for goinge into Porterico before us; but Sir John prevayled, for that hee
was sickly, Sir Francis beinge loth to breed his further disquiet. The
reason of his stay was, to trimme his shippes, mounte his ordinance, take
in water, set by some new pinnaces, and to make things in that rediness,
that he cared not to meet with the king’s whole fleete. Heere we stayed
doinge these necessaries three dayes. This is a desarte, and was without
inhabitants.

On the fourth of November we departed, and being becalmed under the lee
of the land, Sir Francis caused the Richarde, one of the victuallers,
to be unladen and sunk. The eighth wee anchored amonge the Virginees,
other west ilandes: heere we drew our companie on shore, that every man
might knowe his colours, and wee founde our companie shorte of the one
thousand two hundred promised for lande service, few of the captains
having above ninety, most not eighty, some not fifty; which fell out
partly for that the generalls had selected to them a companie for theyr
guarde, of many of the gallantest men of the army. Sir John his sicknes
incresed. Sir Francis apointed captaines to the merchants’ shippes: this
consumed time till the eleventh, when we passed a sounde, though, by
our mariners, never passed by fleet afore, and we came to anchor before
Porterico on the twelfth, about three of the clocke in the afternoone,
at what time Sir John Hawkins died. I made my men ready presently to
have landed, knowinge that our sodaine resolution would greatly have
danted the enemie, and have held our [own men] in opinion of assured
victory; but I was countermanded by authoritie, and during the time
of our deliberation, the enemie labored by all meanes to cause us to
disankar, so workinge, that within an houre hee had planted three or
four pieces of artillery upon the shore next unto us, and playinge upon
the Defiance, knowing her to be the Admirall, whilest our generalls sate
at souper with Sir Nicholas Clifford and diverse other, a shotte came
amongst them, wherwith Sir Nicholas, Brute, Brown, Captain Strafford, who
had Greenstone’s company, and some standers by, were hurte. Sir Nicholas
died that night, so secondinge Sir John Hawkins in his death as he did
in his opinion at Guadalupe. My brother Browne lived five or six days
after, and died much bewayled. This shotte made our generall to way and
fall further to the westward, where we rode safely. The five frigotts
before spoken of rode within their forts: wee had no place nowe to lande
our men but within them in the face of the towne, which was dangerous,
for that both shippes and forts could playe on us; it was therefore
concluded that boats should fire them where they rode. Captain Poore and
mysealfe had the comande of this service; for the regiments, Captain
Salisburie comandinge; the grand captain companye was sent by the
generalls; diverse sea commanders were also sent; and on the thirteenth
at night passinge in harde under the forte, we set three of them on fire;
only one of which, it was my chance to undertake, was burnt; on the
others, the fire held not by reason that being once out they were not
maintained with newe. The burnte shippe gave a greate light, the enemie
thereby playinge upon us with their ordinance and small shotte as if it
had been fayre daye, and sinkinge some of our boates: a man could hardly
comande his mariners to row, they foolishly thinkinge every place more
dangerous than where they were, when, indeede, none was sure. Thus doinge
no harme, we returned with two or three prisoners, when, indeede, in
my poore oppinion, it had binne an easier matter to bringe them out of
the harborowe than fire them as wee did, for our men aboard the shippes
numbred five thousand one hundred and sixty peeces of artillerie that
played on us during this service; and it had binne less dangerous to have
abidden them close in the frigotts and in the darke than as wee did;
but great comanders many tymes fayle in theyre judgment, beinge crost
by a compartner; but I had cause of more griefe than the Indies could
yielde mee of joye, losinge my Alfierez,[2] Davis Pursell; Mr. Vaughan,
a brother-in-law of Sir John Hawkins, with three others; Thomas Powton,
with five or six more hurte and maimed; and was somwhat discomfited,
for the generall feigned heere to set up his rest; but examininge the
prisoners, by whom hee understoode that these frigotts were sent for his
treasure, and that they would have fallen amonge us at Guadalupe had
they not taken the Francis, his minde altered: callinge to counsaile, he
comanded us to give our opinions what we thought of the strength of the
place. Most thought it would hazard the whole action. But one Rush, a
captaine, more to mee aleadged that without better puttinge for it, [than
by] the bare lookinge upon the outside of the forts, we could hardly
give such judgment; and I set it playnely under my hande, that if we
resolutely attempted it, all was ours; and that I persuaded mysealfe no
towne in the Indies could yielde us more honnor or profitte. The generall
presently saide: “I will bring thee to twenty places farre more wealthye
and easier to be gotten.” Such-like speeches I thinke had bewitched the
coronell for he most desired him to hasten him hence.

The enemie, the day after we had fired the frigotts, suncke together four
to save us labour, but chiefly to strengthen their fortes: two other
greate shippes they suncke and fired in the mouth of the harborowe to
give them light to playe on us from theyr fortes as we entred the first
night. And hence we went the fifteenth. Heere I left all hope of good
successe.

On the nineteenth we came to anchor in a fayre baye (the baye of Sta.
Jermana), at the westermost part of the ilande, where wee stayed till
the twenty-fourth, settinge up more newe pinnaces and unlodinge the
other newe victualler, the generall takinge the most parte into his owne
shippe as he did of the former. Captaine Yorke, in the Hope, was made
vice-admirall. This is a very pleasant and fertile ilande, having upon
it goode store of cattell, fruites, and fish, with all thinges necessary
to man’s sustenance; and were it well manured, no place could yielde
it in greater abundance or better. Departing hence, we had our course
for Corasaw.[3] The seconde daye after our puttinge of, the Exchange, a
small shippe, spronge her mast, and was sunke; the men and parte of the
victualls were saved by other shippes. Twenty-ninth.—Upon Corasaw there
is great store of cattell and goates, and we fell with it upon Saturday
the twenty-ninth; but our generall, deceaved by the currante and westerly
course, made it for Arabir,[4] an iland lyinge ten or twelve leagues
to the westwarde, and so made no staye; when, next morninge descryenge
whether hee founde his error, wee bore with Cape De la Vela, and from
thence our coronell, with all the companies in the pinnaces and boates
were sent to the cittie of Rio de la Hacha, and with small resistance
wee tooke it the first of December at night. The generall came unto us
the next morning with the fleete. This towne was left bare of goodes:
the inhabitants havinge intelligence of our cominge, had caried all in
the woodes, and hid theyr treasure in casshes;[5] but, stayinge heere
seventeen days, wee made so goode search, that little remained unfounde
within four leagues of the towne. We tooke many prisoners, Spaniards and
negroes, some slaves repairinge to us voluntarily. The generall with two
hundred men went in boates to Lancheria, which is a place where they fish
for pearle, standinge ten leagues to the estwarde of theyr towne, from
whence they brought goode store of pearle, and tooke a carvell, in which
was some monie, wine, and myrr.

During our stay heere, the governor once, diverse others often, repaired
unto us to redeeme theyr towne, Lancheria, boates and slaves. They did
this to gaine time to convey away the kinge’s treasure and to advertyse
theyr neighbour towne to convey their treasure in more safetye then
themselves had done; for the whole (except the slaves who voluntarily
repayred unto us) was yielded unto them for twenty-four thousand peasos,
five shillings and sixpence a peece, to bee payde in pearles; bringinge
these to theyr towne at the daye and valuinge in double the price they
were worth. Our generall delivered the hostages and set their towne
(Lancheria) and boates on fire, carryinge their slaves with us. The
wealth we had heere was given to countervayle the charge of the jorney;
but I feare it will not so prove in the end. Our vice-admirall, Captaine
Yorcke, died heere of sicknes. This is an exceedinge goode countrye,
champion and well inhabited; great store of cattayle, horses, sheepe,
goates, fish, and fowle, wheron wee fedde, but smale store of graine or
fruite neere the towne, rich only in pearle and cattell.

The twentieth, being Saturday, we came to St. Tomarta.[6] We suncke
two catches before we came to Rio de la Hacha, which we brought out of
England. Presently, upon our coming to anchors, we landed and gave upon
the town. We found small resistance more than a fewe shotte playinge out
of the woodes as we marched towards the towne. Companies were presently
sent abroade to discover and searche the countrye. The inhabitants had to
long forewarninge to carry theyr goods out of our possibilitie to find
them in so short time; little or nothing of valew was gotten, only the
Leiftenant-governor and some others were taken prisoners; and firyinge
the towne the twenty-first, we departed.

Captain Worrell, our trenchmaster, died at this towne of sicknes. This
was a very prettie towne, and six leagues off there was a gould mine.
If part of our companie had been sent thither upon our first arrival
at Rio de la Hacha, doubtles we had done much goode, but now they had
scrube it very bare. In this place was great store of fruite and much
fernandobuck;[7] for that the winde blewe so extremely, and the rode
wilde, we could not shippe it. Before we departed hence, it was concluded
that we should passe Cartagena and go directly for Nombre de Dios. We
anchored in the rode on Sunday followinge, beinge the twenty-seventh;
and landinge presently, receavinge some small shotte from the towne, we
founde small resistance more than a little forte at the east side of
theyr towne, in which they had left one peece of ordinance which brake
at the first shotte. They gave upon us as we gave upon them: certaine
prisoners were taken in the flyinge, who made it knowne, that havinge
intelligence, longe before, of our cominge, theyr treasure was conveyed
to places of more safetie, eyther to Panama or secretly hidden; and it
might very well bee, for the towne was left very bare; wherefore it was
resolved that we should hasten with speed for Panama. Nombre de Dios
standeth on the north-side sea, Panama upon the south, distant some
eighteen or nineteen leagues. There were only two wayes to get thither;
one by the river Chagree, which lyeth to the westward twenty leagues;
upon this it is passable within five leagues of Panama: the other through
deserts and over mountaines voide of inhabitants: this was troublesom
and harde, as well for want of means to carry our provision of meate
and munition as for the ill passage with an armie through these deserts
and unknown places. That by the river our generall held more dangerous,
fayninge there was no place for our fleet to wade safely. This made our
coronell to yeelde to the waye by the mountaine, though he and others
foresawe the danger before our settinge hence; but he resolved to make
tryall of what coulde be done.

So on Monday the twenty-ninth we began our jorney, takinge with us the
strongest and lustiest of our armie, to the number of fifty men and
seven colours. Before our settinge hence, we buried Captaine Arnolde
Baskerville, our serjant-major generall, a gallant gentleman. The first
daye we marched three leagues; the next, six leagues, where we came to
a greate house which the enemie had sett on fire, it beinge a place
where the kinge’s mules do use to lodge cominge from Panama to Nombre de
Dios with his treasure: it is the midway betwixt both places. The house
would receave five hundred horses. We had not marched fully a league on
Wednesday morninge, when we came to a place fortified upon the toppe of
an hill, which the enemie defended. We had noe other way to passe nor
noe means to make our approach but a very deepe lande, where but one
could passe at once, unles it were by clammeringe upon the bancks and
creepinge up the hill through the brakes, which some of our men did, and
came to the trees which they had plasshed to make theyr palizadoe, over
which they coulde not passe, the many bowes so hindered them. It was my
chance, clammeringe up the banckes to repaire to three musketters which
I had holpen up, to fall directly betwixt two of theyr places fortified,
cominge unto two paths by which they fetched their water, and givinge
presently upon them, the place being open, my small number found to goode
resistance, and I was driven to retire with the losse of these fewe.
Heere was the only place to beate them from theyr houlde, wherof I sent
the coronell worde, Captaine Poore and Bartlett and others repayringe to
me. I shewed them the path; we heard the enemie plasshinge and fellinge
of trees farre before us. The coronell sent for us to come unto him: he
debated with us what he foresaw before our cominge from Nombre de Dios,
and though he thought, in his oppinion, we should feare the enemie hence,
yet, havinge retreits upon retreits, they would kill our best men without
takinge little or any hurte themselves; and our men began to drop apace;
our powder and match were spoilde by much rain and waters which we had
passed, unles it were such as som of our souldiers had with more care
preserved. The provision for meate at our coming from Nombre de Dios was
seven or eight cakes of bisked or ruske for a man, which was eyther by
wette spoyled, or theyr greediness had devoured; so there remained to
fewe one daye’s bread; to most none at all. Our hurte men, as Captaine
Nicholas Baskerville and some other of accounte, we should be driven to
leave to the mercie of the enemie, unles they could houlde companie.
Before our cominge to Panama, had we beaten them from all these houlds,
which I think would have bin to dangerous for us to have attempted,
consideringe the estate we were in, we must have fought with them at a
bridge where they had intrenched themselves in a far greater number than
we were; and it is manifest, if we had not within three days gotten some
releife, we had bin overthrowen, though no enemie had fought against
us. But our stomacks callinge these, with other dangers, to his carefull
consideration, he resolved to retire, and so commanded us to cause the
slaine to be throwne out of sight, the hurte to be sent to the quarter
from whence we came that morninge, and the rest to be drawen away. Heere
were slaine Captaine Marchant, our quarter-master, with some other
officers, gentlemen, and souldiers. Upon our coming to the quarter, the
coronell took view of the hurte, and for such as could ride he procured
all the horses of the armie; for the other, he entreated the enemie to
entreate them kindly, as they expected the like from us towards theyrs,
of which we had a farre greater number.

On the seconde of January we returned to Nombre de Dios; our men so
wearied with the ilnes of the waye, sur-baited for want of shoes, and
weake with theyr diet, that it would have bin a poor dayes service that
we should have done upon an enimie had they been there to resist us.
I am persuaded that never armie, great or small, undertooke a march
through to unknown places so weakly provided and with so small means to
help themselves, unles it might be some few goinge covertly to do som
sodaine exploite before it were thought of by the enemie, and so returne
unspied; for, undoubtedly, two hundred men foreknowinge their intentions
and provided with all things necessarie, are able to breake or weaken the
greatest force that any prince in Christendome can bringe thither, if he
had place to finde more than we had. This marche had made many swere that
he will never venture to buy gould at such a price againe. I confesse
noble spiritts, desirous to do service to theyr prince and country, may
soon be persuaded to all hardnes and danger; but havinge once made tryall
therof, would be very loth, as I suppose, to carry any force that way
againe; for beholdinge it in many places, a man would judge it dangerous
for one man to passe alone, almost impossible for horses and an armie.

The daye that our generall had newes of our returne, he ment to way and
fall nearer to the river Chagree with the fleete, leavinge some few to
bringe us if we were enforced to retire, wherof hee little doubted. But
beinge beaten from the place where it appeered all his hopes rested
for gayninge to himselfe and others this masse of treasure which he
so confidently promised before, it was high time for him to devise of
some other course. Wherfore, on the fourth of January, he called us
to counsayle, and debated with us what was nowe to be done. All these
parties had notice long before of all our intentions, as it appeered by
letters written from the governor of Lima to the governor of Panama and
Numbre de Dios, givinge them advice to be carefull and to looke well to
themselves, for that Drake and Hawkins were makinge readie in England to
come upon them. Lima is distant from these places more than three hundred
leagues, all overlayed with snakes. It appeareth that they had good
intelligence. This made them to convey theyr treasure to places which
they resolved to defend with better force than we were able to attempt.
Like as upon the cominge of the sun, dewes and mistes begin to vanish,
so our blinded eyes began now to open, and wee founde that the glorious
speeches, of an hundred places that they knew in the Indies to make
us rich, was but a baite to drawe Her Majestie to give them honorable
employments and us to adventure our lives for theyr glory; for now cards
and mappes must bee our cheefest directors, hee beinge in these partes at
the furthest limit of his knowledge. There hee found out a place called
Laguna de Nichoragua, upon which standeth certaine townes, as Granada,
Leon, and others; also the bay of Honduras, a place knowne to be of
small wealth by itsealfe, unles it be brought thither to be imbarqued
for Spaine. He demanded which of those we would attempt; our coronell
saide, bothe, one after another, and all to little to content us if wee
tooke them. It was then resolved that we should first for the river, and
as matters fell out, for the other. Numbre de Dios, together with their
negroe towne were fyred; and we suncke and fyred fourteen small frigotts
which we founde in the rode. We gott here twenty barres of silver, with
som gould and certaine plate; more would have benne founde, had it bene
well sought; but our generall thought it folly to gather our harvest
graine by graine, beinge so likely at Panama to thrust our handes into
the whole heapes: and after our returne, beinge troubled in minde, hee
seemed little to regard any consayle that should be given him to that
purpose, but to hasten thence as fast as he might. This is a most wealthy
place, being setled upon a grounde full of camphyre, environed with hilly
woodes and mountaines, the bottom a dampish fen. Hence wee departed the
fifth, and held our course for Nichragua.

On the ninth we founde a very deepe and dangerous baye, playinge it
here up and downe: all men weary of the place. The tenth we descried a
small iland called Escudes, where we came to anchor: and here we tooke a
frygotte which was an advice of the kinge’s. By this we learned that the
townes standinge upon this lake, were of small wealth and very dangerous,
by reason of many shoals and greate roughes our mariners should have, it
beinge an hundred leagues: yet if the winde would have permitted, we had
assuredly put for them, and never returned to one halfe againe. Heere we
stayed, at a waste island where there was no reliefe but a few tortoyses
for such as could catch them, twelve days. This is counted the sickliest
place of the Indies; and heere died many of our men, victualls beginninge
to growe scarse with us. In the end, findinge the winde to continue
contrary, he resolved to departe, and to take the winde as God sent it.

So on the twenty-second we went hence, having there buried Captaine
Plott, Egerton, and divers others. I questioned with our generall, beinge
often private with him whilst we stayed heere, to see whether hee would
reveale unto mee any of his purposes; and I demanded of him, why hee so
often conjured me, beinge in England, to stay with him in these partes
as longe as himselfe, and where the place was. He answered me with
griefe, protestinge that hee was as ignorant of the Indies as mysealfe,
and that he never thought any place could be so changed, as it were from
a delitious and pleasant arbour into a wast and desarte wildernesse;
besides the variableness of the winde and weather, so stormie and
blusterous as hee never sawe it before. But hee most wondred that since
his cominge out of England he never sawe sayle worth givinge chace unto:
yet in the greatness of his minde, hee would, in the end, conclude with
these wordes: “It matters not, man; God hath many thinges in store for
us; and I knowe many means to do Her Majestie good service and to make
us riche, for we must have gould before wee see Englande”; when, goode
gentleman, (in my conceite) it fared with him as with some careles
livinge man who prodigally consumes his time, fondly perswadinge himselfe
that the nurse that fedde him in his childhood will likewise nourish him
in his ould age, and, finding the dugge dried and withered, enforced then
to behould his folly, tormented in mind, dieth with a starved bodie. Hee
had, beside his own adventure, gaged his owne reputation greatly, in
promisinge Her Majestie to do her honorable service, and to returne her
a very profitable adventure; and havinge sufficiently experienced, for
seven or eight years together, how hard it was to regain favour once ill
thought of, the mistresse of his fortune now leavinge him to yield to a
discontented minde. And since our returne from Panama he never caried
mirth nor joy in his face; yet no man hee loved must conjecture that
hee tooke thought thereof. But heere hee began to grow sickly. At this
iland we suncke a carvell which we brought out of England, puttinge her
men and victualls into a last taken frigott. From hence a great currante
setts towards the estward; by reason wherof, with the scant of winde
we had on Wednesday, beinge the twenty-eight, we came to Portabella,
which is within eight or nine leagues of Numbre de Dios. It was the best
harborough we came unto sence we left Plymouth.

This morninge, about seven of the clocke, Sir Francis died. The next day
Sir Thomas Baskerville caried him a league of, and buried him in the sea.
In this place, the inhabitants of Numbre de Dios meant to build a towne,
it beinge far more healthye than where they dwell. Heere they began a
forte which alreadie cost the kinge seven thousand purses, and a fewe
houses towards their town, which they called Civitas Sti. Philippi. Them
we fired, rasinge the fortification to the grounde. Heere we found, as in
other places, all abandoned; theyr ordinance cast into the sea, some of
which we founde, and caried aboard the Garland.

Our generalls beinge dead, most men’s heartes were bent to hasten for
England as soon as they might; but Sir Thomas Baskervile havinge the
comand of the armie by vertue of Her Majestie’s broad seale, endeavoured
to prevent the disseveringe of the fleet, and to that end, talked
with such as hee hearde intended to quite companie before they were
disembogued, and drew all companies to subscribe to certaine articles
signifyinge our purposes—viz., that puttinge hence, wee should turne
it backe to St. Tomarto[8] if the winde would suffer us, otherwise to
run over for Jamaica, where it was thought we should bee refreshed with
some victualls. Matters thus concluded, the Delight, the Elizabeth, and
our late taken frigotts were suncke. Many of the negro men and base
prisoners were here put on shore; and heere we wayed on Sunday the eighth
of February. Our victualls began to shorten apace, yet we had lyen a
longe time at very harde alowance,—four men each morninge one quarte
of beere and cake of biskett for diner, and for supper one quarte of
beere and two cakes of biskett and two cans of water, with a pinte of
pease or half a pinte of rise or somwhat more of oatemeale. This was
our allowance beinge at Portabella and six weekes before, but that we
had sometime stockfish. From thence there is a current that sets to the
eastward, by the helpe of which, on the fourteenth, wee had sight of an
iland shorte of Carthagena fifteen or sixteen leagues; further than this
wee could not go to the estward, for that the current had left us. The
fifteenth at night, it beinge faire weather, we lost sight of our fleete.
Heere as I grew discontented, knowinge it touched my poore regulation so
to leave the armie; and I had many thinges to perswade mee that it was
done of purpose by the captaine and master, therby gaininge an excuse
to departe; I shewed the captaine of the danger he should run into by
leavinge so honorable forces when they had neede of our companie: and God
knoweth that had I had but judgment which way to have cast for them, I
would rather have lost my life then so forsake the like. He deposed on
the bible, and Christianitie made me believe him. But playinge it up and
downe about twelve of the clocke, and discoveringe none of them, the wind
blew so contrary that the seamen affirmed by houldinge this course we
should be cast backe in the bay, and they perswaded that our fleete could
not attaine St. Tomarto, but were gone over for Jamaica, whither they
would follow then. I plainly forsaw that if we missed them there, it was
like that we should no more meete till we came to England, which would
have made me to perswade a longer search upon the maine; but my hope of
their beinge there, together with the weakness of our men and the small
meanes we had to retaine them, fearinge lest my delay might endanger Her
Majesties shippes and the whole companie, I yielded to theyr perswasions.
We were in ten degrees and a halfe when we put from hence, and we came
till the twenty-second, when we had sight of a very dangerous shoale
which our seamen thought they had passed neare two dayes before. If we
had fallen with it in the night we had bin all lost. The shoale is named
Secrana.

On Shrove Wensday, being the twenty-fourth, we fell with Jamaica, and
by meanes of a Mulatow and an Indian, we had, this night, forty bundles
of dried beife, which served our whole companie so many dayes. We came
to anchor at the westermost parte of the iland, in a faire, sandie
bay, where we watered, and stayed, in hope to have some newes of our
fleete, seven dayes. This, our stay, brought no intelligence, wherfore
our seamen thought that our fleet, not able to recover this place, were
fallen eyther with Cape Corantes or Cape St. Antoine[9]; these places we
ment to touch in our course; and hence we went the first of March. On
the sixth we sawe a shippe on the leaward of us, and the next morninge
we made her to be the Pegasine, one of our fleete, who, as they sayde,
lost the admirall neere the time as we did, beinge by the coronell sent
to the Susan Bonaventure, whom they left in greate distresse, by reason
of a lake they had taken, and I greatly feared, by theyr reporte, they
are perished. There were in her one hundred and thirty or one hundred
and forty persons, many gallant gentlemen and good men. If they perish,
this shippe shall repent it. Houldinge our course for these places, we
descried five sayles a stern of us. We stayed for them, and soone made
them to be none of our fleete; and we had good reason to perswade us they
were enimies. They had the winde of us, but we soone regained it upon
them, which made them, upon a peece of ordinance shott of by the greatest
shippe, tacke about; we tackt with them; when the captain of this shippe
faithfully protested unto me not to shoote a peece of ordinance till we
came boord and boorde, and then I promised him, with our small shot, to
win the greatest or lose our persons. This we might have done without
endangeringe Her Majestie’s shippes; but our enimie, playinge upon us
with theyr ordinance, made our gunners fall to it ere we were at musket
shot, and no nearer could I bringe them, though I had no hope to take
any of them but by boordinge. Heere we popt away powder and shott to
no purpose, for most of our gunners would hardly have stricken Paule’s
steeple had it stoode there. I am a yonge seaman, yet my small judgment
and knowledge makes me avowe, that never shippe of Her Majestie’s went
so vilely manned out of her kingdom; not twenty of them worthy to come
into her shippes; and I know not what had possessed the captaine, but
his mind was cleane altered, tellinge me that he had no authoritie to
lay any shippe aboorde, wherby he might endanger this, Her Majestie’s;
and they beinge, as he sayd, the kinge’s men of warre, they would rather
fire with us than be taken. Had I beene a marchant of her burden (God
favoringe me), they would have bin mine, as many as stoode to the tryall
of theyr fortune; but the paltrie Pegosie we lately met withall never
came neere us by a league, which was some colour to our men to give them
over. So after I had endeavored by mysealfe, my lewetenant and other
gentlemen, by perswasion, to worke the captaine resolutely to attempt
them, and findinge no disposition in him but to consume powder and shott
to no purpose, but firinge it in the ayer, I yielded to give them over,
perswadinge mysealfe that God had even ordained that we should not with
any nature attempt where we were resisted with never so weake forces.
Thus away we went, and the winde choppinge us southerly, our seamen held
that our fleete coulde neither ride at Corants nor at St. Antony, which
made me condescend to leave the Indies, with all her treasure, and to
plye the next course to disembogue,[10] for little hope was left me that
we should do Her Majestie any service, or good to our selves, when, upon
the feigned excuses of endangering her shippes which she sent forth
to fight if occasion were offered; and to perswade mysealfe that. Her
Majestie priseth not her ships deerer than the lives of so many faithful
subjects, who gladly would have ventured theyr lives, and upon no
brain-sick humour, but from a trew desire to do Her Highness some service
for the charge and adventure she had been at in this glorious spoken-of
jorney. Fortune’s child was dead, thinges would not fall into our
mouthes, nor riches be our portions, howe dearly soever we adventured for
them. Thus avoydinge Silla (after the proverbe), we felle into Charibdis,
and indeede we were not nowe farre from it.

Our master, a careful ould man, but not experienced upon these coastes,
rather followinge the advice of others than relienge on his owne
judgment, brought us, on the twelfth, three hours before daye, into
a very shallow water, upon a dangerous bancke, which some held to be
the Meltilettes, others for the Tortugas, eyther like enough to have
swallowed us, had not God blest us with fayre weather. Freinge ourselves
of this danger, upon Monday the fifteenth of March we entered the gulfe,
and by ten of the clocke we brought the Cape of Florida west of us. On
the seventeenth (the Lord be thanked) we were disembogued. After this, we
ran with most fowle weather and contrary windes till the first of May,
when we had soundinge in ninety fathoms, beinge in the Channell, and on
the third we had sight of Sylly; the which day, ere night, we came to
anchor, (the Lord be therefore praysed) 1596.

To give mine oppinion of the Indies, I verily think that filchinge men
of warre shall do more goode then such a fleete, if they have aine
forewarninge of theyr cominge. And unles Her Majestie will undertake so
royally as to dispossesse him of the landes of Porterico, Hispaniola, and
Cuba, her charge will be greater in sendinge thither, then the profitt
such a fleet can returne, for havinge but a fewe days warninge, it is
easy for them to convey theyr goods into assured safetie, as experience
hath taught us. Theyr townes they dare not redeeme, beinge enjoyned
the contrary by the kinge’s comandment. These places will be taken and
possessed by two thousand men; and by this Her Majestie might debarre the
kinge of Spain of his whole profitt of the Indies: and the first gaininge
them will return her a sufficient requittal for her adventure. God grant
I may live to see such an enterprise put in practise; and the kinge of
Spaine will speedily flye to what conditions of peace Her Majestie will
require.

Thus I have truly set down the whole discourse of our voyage, usinge
therin many idle wordes and ill-compared sentences. It was done on the
sea, which I thinke can alter any disposition. Your loves, I thinke, can
pardon these faltes, and secret them from the vewe of others.

The first of March the fleete fell with the Pinnas,[11] on the land of
Cuba, which day they had sight of the Spanish fleete by eleven of the
clocke; where Sir Thomas Baskervile gave directions for the fleete as
thus:—the Garland, being admirall, with one halfe of the fleete to have
the vanguard; the Hope, beinge vice-admirall, with the other halfe, the
rereward. The fight continued fiercely three hours within muskett shott.
That night they saw the Spanish Vice-admirall, a ship of seven hundred
tonne, burned, with other six lost and suncke by the next morninge, when
they departed. The Hope received a leake and was forced to go from the
fleete to an iland, called St. Crusado, inhabited by canniballs, where
they had store of hens and Indian wheate for nine weekes. March eighth,
the fleete shott the gulfe and came for England, leavinge Florida on the
starboard side; and when they came to the Inchanted Islands they were
dispersed, and came home one by one.

                                                         THOMAS MAYNARDE.


FOOTNOTES

[1] Influx of volunteers.

[2] Ensign (borrowed from the Arabic).

[3] Curaçoa.

[4] Aruba.

[5] The French _caches_, hiding places.

[6] Sta. Martha.

[7] Brasil wood, the produce of Pernambuco, or, as the name was
originally written, Fernandobuco.

[8] Santa Martha.

[9] C. Corrientes and C. St. Antonio, at the western extremity of Cuba.

[10] _Disembogue_ signifies here (as in p. 20, l. 22), to pass the
_Bocas_; to get clear of the narrow seas and enter the ocean.

[11] The Isla de Pinos.




                                RELACION
                             DE LO SUCEDIDO
                EN SAN JUAN DE PUERTO RICO DE LAS YNDIAS,
                          CON LA ARMADA YNGLESA
                              DEL CARGO DE
                     FRANCIS DRAQUE Y JUAN AQUINES,
                       A LOS 23RD DE NOVIEMBRE DE
                                  1595.




RELACION DE LO SUCEDIDO, ETC.


Aviendo salido de la Avana para Espana el general Sancho Pardo y Osorio
a los 10 de Março deste año, con la capitana de la flota de tierra
firme de su cargo, en conserva de la armada de don Franᵒ. Coloma, y
aviendose allado[1] en la tormenta que corrio desembocada de la canal
a los 15 del dho mes en altura de 28 grados y medio, sin arbol mayor,
rompido el timon, y la nao haciendo mucha agua, apartada de las demas,
imposibilitada de seguir su viage, para salvar las vidas de 300 personas
que en ella venian y dos millones de oro y plata de su Magestad y
particulares, con acuerdo y parecer del vehedor Martin Vomero de Caamaño
y de los pilotos y demas personas platicas que alli se allaron, aribo a
Puerto rico a donde bien milagrosamente llego a los 9 de April, y alli
desembarco y puso la Plata en la fortaleça de la ciudad. Luego el dho
general despacho a su Magestad primero y secundo aviso haciendoles saver
su ariba, para que mandase lo que hubiese de haçer, y parece que la
divina [providencia] permitio por secretos suyos que la orden, pudiendo
ser antes, llegare a tiempo que no solo aseguro la Plata sino esta tierra
y seria posible todas las Yndias, por lo que adelante se vera, aquien se
pueden dar muchas gratias.

Pocos dias despues de aver despachado los dhos avisos, los tuvo de su
Magestad el governador desta ysla Pedro Suares Coronel en que le aviso
en que en Yngalaterra se aprestava una gruesa armada para venir aganar
esta ysla en tiempo de embierno, por pareçer que entonçes estaria menos
apercevida. Entendidos por el general y el dho veedor los dhos avisos se
juntaron con el governador y con Franᵒ. Cid, capitan de la ynfanteria
deste presidio, y tratado y conferido las preventiones que se debian
haçer para seguridad de la tierra y Plata de su Magestad para que en caso
que el enemigo viniese no se apoderase de todo ello, fueron todos juntos
a reconecer los sitios y baraderos por donde el enemigo podia acometer
y echar gente en tierra, y que en las partes que al general le parecio,
mando plantar parte de la artilleria de su capitana y atravesar la nao
en la canal del puerto, para que quando viniese el enemigo, se echase a
fondo y sele çegase la entrada, pareciendo que por alli avia de acometer
y lo demas riesgo, y contener la gente en buena guarida; se estubo en
espera de la orden de su Magestad para hacer su viage.

A los 13th de Nobiembre deste año llego a este puerto Don Pedro Tello de
Guzman, con las cincas fragatas de su Magestad para que el general Sancho
Pardo embarcase en ella la plata de su Magestad y se fuese la buelta de
españa, haciendo officio de su Almirante el dho Pedro Tello, el qual
despues de aver entregado sus despachos, le dijo al dho general como
viniendo en seguimiento de su viage, avian encontrado dos navios yngleses
en la ysla de Guadalupe, que se avian apartado de la armada ynglesa y
que su almirante Gonçalo Mendez de Canço avia rendido y echado a fondo
el uno, despues de aver le sacado os yngleses prisiones y que yendo el
dho Don Pedro en seguimiento del otro navio descubrio nueve velas de la
armada del enemigo, y desque las vio viro la otra buelta siguiendo su
viage; y que los dhos yngleses prisioneros avian declarado que cerca
de alli en la misma ysla de Guadalupe a la banda del sur, estava surta
la armada de la reyna de yngalaterra, y aprestando lanchas con veinte
y cinco navios, los seis de los galeones de la reyna de 800 toneladas
y otros dos del mesmo porte de particulares, y todos en dos esquadras,
y por generales Franᵒ. Draque y Juan Aquines, governando la derota y
cosas de tierra Franᵒ. Draque y su lugarteniente en tierra Don Thomas
Vasquezarfil; y que traia la armada 30[2] infantes y 10,500 marineros
bien artillados, y que venian derechos a Puerto rico, como parecia por la
ynstruccion que se le tomo al capitan del dho navio yngles en la qual se
le ordeno en caso que por alguno forçoso se apartase, viniese a Puerto
rico, donde le aguardarian 10 dias, y que alli se dexarian orden adonde
avian de yr despues, sin declarar otro disegno; y que conforme a esto el
dho Don Pedro venia temeroso que no ubiese venido delante y estubiese
ganada la tierra, y que puesto no avia sido, tenia por cierto que aes
otro dia estaria sobre el puerto, y que conforme a esto el general
ordenase su partida como mas pareciese combenir.

Visto el general Sancho Pardo la relacion del dho Don Pedro Tello y
su Almirante Gonçalo Mendez y que esta nueba le allava en la cama
y indispuesto de enfermidad, de algunos dias avia estava con ella,
hiço avisar a Obispo y al governador, pidiendoles se viesen con el y
los capitanes de fragatas Marco Antonio Becerra, cabo de la compania
de Arcabuçeros, y Pedro de Guia del avito de San Juan, y Domingo de
Ynsaurraga, Franᵒ. Gomez, capitan deste presidio, y el veedor Martin
Vomero de Caamaño, Juan de la Vera, contador de las fragatas; y todos
juntos en su posada y aviendo tratado y propuesto el dho general la
relacion que tenia del enemigo y los medios mas combenientes que avia
por la seguridad de la tierra y plata; supuesto que la armada enemiga
era tanta y esperarse tan breve, y que las fragatas precisamente tenian
necesidad de adereçarse y meter agua y leña y embarcarse la plata en
que se avian de detener ocho dias por lo menos, y considerando que el
enemigo quando estuviese con esta ocupacion, y quando no por el aviso que
le pudo dar el otro navio que se vio, que estas fragatas venian por la
plata que ya savia que estava aqui, la podia esperar al paso, oque de la
tierra se podia apoderar y fortificarse en ella para conquistar a todas
las Yndias, en que a su Magestad leseguia gran perjucio y daño de su
reputacion.

Todos de unanime conformes acordaron que la tierra se fortificase con la
artilleria y gente, y que la nao capitana de tierra firme y otro de Pedro
Milanes se echasen a fondo en la canal del puerto para çegar la entrada,
y que la plata no se mudase de la fortaleça asta ver como las cosas se
ponian, pareciendo estara alli mas segura y en parte donde quando per
nuestros pecados se lo ordenava, se pudiera echar al a mar paraque no la
goçase el enemigo, y con esta resolucion sean ydo poniendo en execution
con mucha priesa y diligencia de noche y de dia todas prevençiones
posibles.

El general Sancho Pardo como persona de tanta experientia y que tenia
visto y reconoçido los sitios y puertos de la tierra, aseguro al dho Don
Pedro Tello y a los que con el venian, que era caso ymposible perderse la
tierra quiriendo los nuestros pelear y haçer el deber, y que solo avia
tener cuidado del puerto, que la armada no se metiese de golpe, y que par
eso era bien se echasen a fondo las dos naos que estava acordado, y en
sus espaldas las fragatas con las proas a la mar par resistir la entrada,
y que con eso estava segura la tierra y plata de su Magestad, de que
seria muy servido, en cuyo nombre les pedio acudiesen a sus obligaciones;
y para esto Don Pedro Tello tomo a su cargo la defensa del puerto.

El Obispo offreçio de deçir el otro dia una misa y una platica ala
gente, como lo hiço, christianamente encargandole el serviçio de Dios y
de su rey, y siempre continuo este officio de noche y de dia visitando
los puestos donde la gente estava, puniendo en cada uno un saçerdote y
animandolos con mucho exfuerço.

Este dia el governador y general despacharon un barco con aviso a sancto
Domingo para que se pusiesen y estubiesen a la mira por si el enemigo
yba alla como se entiende y se le escrivio al Presidente, que luego
avisase lo mismo a Cartagena y a Sancta Maria.

Luego se hiço muestra de toda la gente de la tierra, y parte de la que
avia en las fragatas se desembarco por ser necesario para la tierra;
allose en todo a 10,300 personas y en estos 700 de pelea y los 800
de fragatas y capitana de tierra firme, y las demas del presidio y
forasteros, en los quales avia 50 de a cavallo con lança y adarga, que
todo se repartieron en la forma siguiente:

    En la caleta del morillo el Capitan Pedro de Guia del
      avito de San Juan, con ciento cinquenta soldados                150

    En la caleta del cabron, Alonso de Vargas con cien soldados       100

    En la puente y boqueron, Pedro Vazquez Alferez con ciento
      y cinquenta soldados                                            150

    En las fragatas, trecientas personas a orden de Don Pedro Tello   300

    En el voca de vayamon, el capitan Otega con cinquenta soldados     50
                                                                      ---
                                                                      750

Toda la demas gente esta en el morro y en la plaça de Armas a cargo del
capitan Marco Antonio Veçerra y la de a cavallo al del governador, para
acudir los dos cada uno con la de su cargo, a la parte mas combiniente y
que mas neçesidas tubiese de socorro.

    ARTILLERIA PLANTADA.

    En el morro, veinte y siete pieças de bronçe muy buenas            27

    En la plata forma del otro morro, çinco pieças                      5

    En sancta elena, quatro pieças                                      4

    En la caleta de los frayles junto a la fortaleça, tres pieças       3

    En la caleta de sancta catalina, çinco pieças                       5

    En el tejar, nuebe pieças                                           9

    En la boca de vayamon, dos pieças                                   2

    En la puente y en un navio que alla se puso, seis pieças            6

    En el boqueron, quatro pieças                                       4

    En la caleta de cabron, dos pieças                                  2

    En la caleta del morillo, tres pieças                               3
                                                                      ---
                                                                       70

y las fragatas bien artilladas; sin las quales avia las dhas setenta
pieças de artilleria plantadas y buenos artilleros en cada puesto y por
sobreestante de los fuertes del morro y morillo de sancta Elena, el
Almirante Gonçalo Mendez de Canço.

A los 15 del dho llego aviso dal governador de Canaria despachado al
de aqui, para que supiese como la armada enemiga avia pasado por alli
y aviendo echado alguna gente en tierra para haçer agua, le avian echo
retirar con daño de veinte y çinco personas, y que venia la buelta de las
yndias; y el dho aviso dijo como al pasar por la ysla de san Martin avia
visto surta la armada con veinte y çinco velas.

Luego el dho dia el General Sancho Pardo despacho el mismo al governador
de la Avana y le escrivio avisase a nueva España al general Pedro
Melendez que estava alla con su flota. Estando echas todas estas
preventiones toda la gente deseosa de verse con el enemigo, entraron
en consejo el dho general y Don Pedro Tello, y el Almirante Gonçalo
Mendez y los capitanes Marco Antonio Veçerra, Pedro de Guia, Domingo
de Ynsaurraga, el vehedor Martin Vomero de Caamaño, y aviendo tratado
si seria bien embarcar la plata en dos fragatas, para que en caso que
el enemigo se pusiese sobre el puerto, como mas lijeras se pudiesen
escapar de noche, siguiendoles las otras tres en reta guardia, para que
si se ofreçiese quedasen peleando y las dos siguiesen su viage; los
mas Votos conformaronse enque no se mudase la plata de donde estava,
porque seria desanimar la gente de la tierra que estava con animo de
defenderla peleando, y viendo que los desemparavan sedesanimarian y su
Magestad perderia la tierra y su reputacion, enque le iba a deçir mucho
mas de lo que le importava la plata; que lo que conbenio era haçer
rostro al enemigo confiando en Dios que nos daria victoria; y visto por
el general la mayor parte de los pareceres, ordeno a Don Pedro Tello
que con diligencia aprestase las fragatas, para quando lo estubiese y
combiniese embarcar la plata se hiçiese, en el entretanto que el enemigo
daria muestras de si por si estubiese esperando al passo, mando fuese una
carabela la buelta de la mar 50 leguas a descubrir; y ansi se hiço y la
plata se estubo queda que fue bien açertado.

Miercoles 22 del dho mes de Nobiembre al amaneçer se descubrio la armada
enemiga a la vista de tierra con 23 velas y una carabela latina, las
6 galeones de la reyna de 800 toneladas, y dos naos del mismo porte y
los demas navios de 300, y de 150, y de ayavajo y 40 lanchas venian
navegando bien recogidas. Luego se toco a arma y cada qual acudio a su
puesto con mucha alegria y buen animo de pelear. El viento era poco y
asi venia con espacio asta que entro la briça. Venia delante la carabela
latina y algunas lanchas soldando la costa con vanderas blancas en señal,
y llegandose una enfrente del boqueron, le tiraron de alli con una
pieça que la hiçieron retirar a la mar y luego pusieron otras vanderas
coloradas; y pasando delante despues del medio dia, dio fondo toda
la armada enfrente de la caleta del cabron donde jamas se vio surgir
ningun navio por ser costa y donde no se savia que se podia dar fondo
asta despues de ser ydo el enemigo, que embio el general a sondar la
parte donde estubo y se allo de 20 a 30 braças en limpio, y segun lo
que se entendio era su fin echar alli gente de vajo de su artilleria,
pareçiendole allarnos desaperçevidos y que no ubiese ninguna muestra que
se le resistiese el paso, y allose engañado.

Estando junta la dha Armada en la parte que digo, los nuestros le tiraron
muchas pieças de artilleria del morrillo y de la caleta del cabron, tanto
que algunas valas le hiçieron dano por lo que despues que se supo que le
mataron a Juan Aquines, general de la una esquadra y a dos caballeros de
los principales que con el venian y otra gente, y que a Franᵒ. Draque le
llevaron la mesa en que estava comiendo y la bala dio a un personage que
con el venia que se supo no escapara.

Viendo el enemigo el dano que de tierra se le haçia, embio la carabela
latina con un piloto ysléno de naçion mulato que dicen es muy platico
en estas partes, llevando consigo cinco lanchas la buelta del puerto
a reconeçerle y a sondar junto la boca del ysloto que llaman ysla de
Cabras, que esta a la vanda del oeste, y despues de aver fondado volvio
la una lancha a dar aviso a la armada, la qual se desalojo luego de alli
a las cinco de la tarde, sin aver tirado pieça ni un solo mosquete en
todo el tiempo que alli estubo, y se fue buelta de la mar, y de una y
otra se andubo aquella noche asta otro dia.

Juebes siguiente a las ocho de la mañana fue a surgir toda la armada al
socayre del yslote que el dia antes avian soldado junto al puerto, que
fue otro nuebo surgidero no conoçido asta entonçes por ser fondo de 60
braças sobre bajos subjeto a que con qualquiera tiempo de braveça se
pudiera perder en la costa. Alli estubo siendole el tiempo favorable, sin
poder la alcançar nuestra artilleria, y aquella tarde embio dos lanchas a
asondar la playa de vayamon asta la estacada del carivelo y a reconeçer
aquellos vajos para ver si por alli podria echar gente en tierra, y en la
una lancha bein entoldada fue Franᵒ. Draque por lo que despues se supo.

Visto por Don Pedro Tello, a cuyo cargo estava el puerto, las diligencias
que el enemigo haçia, y pareciendole que avia de acometer por la estacada
del carivelo rompiendola aquella noche con lanchas para echar gente en
tierra, acudio al general a dar le quenta dello, y a pedirle gente para
que fuesen a defender a quel paso, y el general ordeno que aquella tarde
estubiese alli el capitan Agustin de Candecho con 30 soldados y que a la
noche fuesen 50 soldados a cargo del vehedor Martin Vomero de Caamaño,
con orden de que si la fuerça del enemigo fuese superior, se retirase con
la gente en los barcos a las fragatas para haçerse fuertes en ellas.

El dicho jueves 23 dia de San Clemente a las 10 de la noche con la
obscuridad acometio el enemigo al puerto con 25 lanchas y en cada una de
50 a 60 personas bien armadas con fin de quemar las fragatas segun lo que
se vio, y todas entraron arrimadas a la plata forma del morro, metiendose
de vajo de la artilleria, y segun lo que despues se supo, Franᵒ. Draque
vino en la una asta la boca del puerto, a meter las demas, y aunque hacia
obscuro se vieron las lanchas y luego començo a jugar la artilleria del
morro y del fuerte de sancta elena y las fragatas muy a priesa, y las
mas de las lanchas embistieron con la fragata texeda Capitana poniendole
fuego por la proa, echandole dentro muchas alcançias, bombas de fuego, y
los nuestros con mucha diligencia lo apagaron sin daño ninguno, peleando
con artilleria, mosqueteria, piedras, y al mismo tiempo pusieron fuego a
la fragata sancta ysabel y a la fragata Magdalena y a sancta clara, el
qual se apago; y la tercera vez que se encendio en la fragata magdalena
de que era capitan Domingo de Ynsaurraga, no se pudo apagar, por averse
encendido por popa con mucha furia, y todo lo que dio lugar a poder estar
en ella y pelear lo hiço el dho capitan y la gente que con el se allo,
astaque estava ya casi quemada y muertas 12 personas de la mosqueteria
del enemigo, y otras tantas que se quemaron; y el dho capitan se escapo
a nado por medio de las lanchas, y se fue a la fragata sancta Ysabel que
estava a cargo del capitan Juan Flores de Rabanal en lugar del capitan
Pedro de Guia que tenia un sitio de tierra a su cargo, y alli ayudo
a todo lo que se ofreçio. Duro el pelear una hora la mas reñida que
sea visto, y con el fuego de la fragata que se quemo, aclaro todo el
puerto de manera que fue bien para las demas que se veian para asentar
nra artilleria y la de los fuertes, con la quel y con la mosqueteria y
piedras que de las fragatas se tiraron, les hicieron tanto daño que se
retiraron acabo de una ora que como digo se peleava, con perdida de 9 o
10 lanchas y mas de 400 personas sin otros muchos que fueron heridos;
no aviendo de nuestra parte mas de la perdida de la fragata y quarenta
personas muertas y quemadas, de la mosqueteria algunos heridos. Fue
muy de ver lo bien que las fragatas pelearon y quan bien les acudio el
artilleria de los fuertes particularmente el de sancta elena que estava
mas amano para ofender las lanchas.

Viernes 24, considerando que el enemigo avia de asegundar aquella noche
y que avia de echar gente en tierra, dende que amaneçio no çesaron
prevençiones por nuestra parte, plantando artilleria en algunos puertos
de tierra como fue en todo el tejar, que estava a cargo del governador
y del Capitan Marco Antonio con la gente del cuerpo de guardia; en la
caleta de sancta Catalina se paso el capitan Guia que antes estava en
el morrillo con 50 arcabujeros, y en la caleta de los frayles junto a
la fortaleça otros dos pieças y 30 soldados a cargo del vehedor Martin
Vomero, y en todas partes se hiçieron muchas trincheras y fortificaçiones
trabajando cada qual con el açadon en la mano, sin que hubiese negro que
a ello ayudase, porque todos los veçinos los embiaron al monte con sus
aciendas y mugeres luego que asomo el enemigo.

Toda via como a las 8 de la mañana con el terral se levo la armada
enemiga buelta a la mar procurando ponerse a barlobento del puerto, y
ansi andubo asta la tarde y pareçiendole a Don Pedro Tello que esto era
para entrarse de golpe en el puerto, fue a tierra a deçirle al general
que le pareçia que el enemigo se venia derecho al puerto, y que con los
dos naos que se avian echado a fondo, no estava del todo çerrado la canal
y que combenia echar dos fragatas en la parte que estava libre para
que del todo se ympidiese la entrada, pues era de tanta importancia a
segurar el puerto que las dos fragatas por muchas considerationes y bien
del serviçio de su Magestad.

El general Sancho Pardo hiço luego junta del governador y de mas
ministros, y luego acordaron que se hechase una fragata a fondo en la
canal a caso que no bastase un navio de Pedro Sedeño que estava cargado
de mercadurias y otro de menos porte, los quales se echasen luego como
estavan, pues el brebedad del tiempo no daba lugar a la descarga, y que
la fragata se echase quando el dho Don Pedro le pareçiese combenir.

A las 4 de la tarde venia el enemigo con la briça caminando açia el
puerto y creyendo Don Pedro Tello que venia derecho a el, echo a fondo
los dos navios de Sedeño y Juan Diaz de Sancta Aña, y la fragata
tejeda, sin que la brebedad del tiempo diese lugar a sacarle todos los
bastimentos y artilleria, aunque alguna parte se saco, y con esto se
çerro toda la entrada de la canal, y el enemigo a la oraçion surgio entre
el morro y la ysla de cabras donde estubo surto la noche antes.

Visto que la armada estava surta y mas cerca de la entrada del puerto, se
volvio a confirmar la sospecha que se tenia de que aquella noche avia de
procurar acabar de quemar las fragatas y echar gente en tierra: Don Pedro
Tello con acuerdo del general hiço retirar las tres fragatas el puerto
adentro, y las metieron en el tejar con gente de guardia por asegurarlas
y no temiendo que echasen gente en tierra, viendo quan bien dispuestos
estavan los animos de los nuestros y todos los sitios y desembarcaderos
atrincherados y fuertes; y el retirar las fragatas fue ya de noche quando
el enemigo no lo pudo ver, y ansi el otro dia por la mañana entendio que
todas las avia echado a fondo aquella noche, se estubo sosegado sin haçer
ninguna demostraçion por nuestra parte si bien estubimos a la mira.

Sabado 25 luego de mañana embio el enemigo siete o ocho lanchas a
reconoçer el puerto y toda la costa asta el boqueron, desbiandose de
tierra porque nuestra artilleria no los ofendiese y a las 10 de la mañana
volvieron a recojerse a la armada que estava junta en la parte dicha.

Este dia a las dos de la tarde asomo nuestra carabela que avia ydo ocho
dias antes a descubrir el enemigo, y como por los nuestros fue vista le
tiraron una pieça del boqueron para que se recojiese sin yr al puerto,
y de la armada le siguieron algunas lanchas asta la playa de cangrejos
donde baro y parte de la cavalleria acudio a socorrer la gente, y Franᵒ.
Gonçalez que venia por piloto y capitan de la dha carabela le saco un
rumbo porque el enemigo no la llevase y ansi las lanchas se alargaron y
se bolvieron sin açer pressa.

El dho sabado en la noche se hiço a la bela toda la armada sin ser vista
y se fue a la mar, y viendo los nuestros a la mañana que no parecia, se
embio luego personas por tierra prolongando la costa del oeste, para
que viesen si pareçia o avia pasado por alli, como se entendia, y yba a
Sancto Domingo.

Lunes volvio un aviso del Arracivo catorçe leguas deste puerto, diçiendo
que la armada avia pasado por alli su camino adelante. Este dia despacho
el governador otro aviso a San German, el qual bolvio dentro de seis dias
con nueba de que la armada estava en el butiro de la açucar la otra vanda
de San German, y que avia echado en tierra cinco compañias de piqueros y
mosqueteros que estavan açiendo carne, agua y leña, y quatro lanchas los
quales hiço en quatro dias por traer lo mas echo.

Aviendo el general visto estos avisos y pareçiendole que podria ser odio
del enemigo, y que de alli podria ponerse al monte en espera de las dhas
fragatas, o querer que fuesen ydas para volver sobre puerto rico por
allarle sin fuerça para apoderarse del y executar el designio que traya
de fortificarse en el, toco a cuerdo de lo que se aria, y se resolvio que
no se saliesen del puerto asta saver de cierto que el enemigo hubiese
pasado adelante de la punta de la Aguada, y que fuese el Capitan Juan
Flores de Rabanal con un pataje 70 v 80 leguas la buelta del norte a
descubrir, y que se embarcase la plata en el entretanto, el qual volvio a
cabo de ocho dias sin aver visto nada.

A nueve de diciembre vino aviso de San German que la armada enemiga era
yda la buelta del Sur.

A once del dho llego asta çiudad Lope Sanchez contramaestre de la fragata
Magdalena y quatro marineros della, que la noche del yncendio de las
fragatas los prendieron en el agua las lanchas del enemigo. A los quales
echo en tierra en el butrio de la azucar con una carta de Franᵒ. Draque
para el governador de aqui, cuya copia es la que sigue;

    CARTA DE FRANᵒ. DRAQUE A PEDRO SUAREZ CORONEL, governador de
    Puerto rico;

    Entendiendo ser Vsᵃ Cavallero prinçipal y soldado escrivo esta
    breve dando a entender como siempre en todas las ocasiones que
    semean offreçido con la naçion Española, la e tratado con mucha
    honora y clemençia, dando libertad a sus personas no apocos mas
    a muchos, ansi que al tiempo que nuestra gente puso fuego a las
    fragatas se salvaron ciertos Españoles en la furia del fuego no
    haçiendo le agravio despues de vençidos sin muy buena guerra.

    Por ellos e savido como la capitana de Don Pedro Tello prendio
    un navichuelo de nuestra armada adonde avia 25 Yngleses, o mas
    haçiendo con ellos buen tratamiento y guerra limpia. Quedo en
    el propio ser que solia, mas aviendo otra cosa, forçosamente
    hase lo que jamas en mi cupo; mas como ay en esa ciudad
    soldados y cavalleros no dudo del buen suçeso de nuestra gente,
    dandoles libertad por virtud de buena guerra, lo qual espero y
    ansi are lo propio; en todo quedo al serviçio de Vsᵃ, salvo la
    causa que ay de por medio de la capitana de la sacra Magᵈ de
    la Reyna de Yngalaterra misᵃ: a 23 Nobiembre de 1595 estilo de
    Yngalaterra.

                                                     FRANᵒ. DRAQUE.

Por relaçion que el dho contramaestre y demas marineros que ocho dias
andubieron con el enemigo, se supo que salieron de alli la buelta del
sur o del susudueste, y que yban a Sancto Domingo y de alli a Panama,
porque deçian que yban adonde avia mucho oro y plata, y ansi se deja
entender por las muchas lanchas que llevaron pertrechos de guerra. Estos
çertificaron la muerte de Juan Aquines y el sentimiento que por el se
hiço y el mucho daño que los enemigos reçivieron, tanto que pasandolos un
dia de la capitana a otro galeon, allaron casi la gente del toda herida
y maltratada, y que se quejaban del daño que las piedras que les tiraron
de las fragatas les hiço, y que fue tanto el mal que el otro dia de la
pelea Franᵒ. Draque hiço consejo sobre si segundaria, no hallo ninguno
que fuese de su pareçer, y mas por averles dhos estes hombres que era
mucha la fuerça que teniamos mas de la que a sido; y que el Draque se
quedo esbentado quando supo la poca gente que se hallo en las fragatas
la noche del fuego, y se tiraba de las barbas por no aver tomado la
plata y la tierra, no se dejando ver aquellos dos dias, quejandose de
Juan Aquines que no quiso que vineran tras las fragatas de la ysla de
Guadalupe luego que supo que le avian cojido el navio y venian a puerto
rico, dando a entender que no tubieramos lugar de fortificarmos como se
hiço en los ocho dias que se tardaron en aprestar sus lanchas y en haçer
agua. Todo lo a ordenado Dios a quien se debe dar muchas graçias, pues
mediante su labor de mas de aver alcançado una victoria tel, con tan poca
gente como de nuestra parte hubo resistiendo la fuerça de una armada tan
poderosa, defendiendo la tierra y dos millones de plata, a su Magestad
selea seguido notables serviçios y a los particulares bien general.

Lo primero, que por lo que sea entendido el enemigo traya fin de
sustentar esta fuerça y fuera le facil con poca costa, porque los
cosarios que andan en esto de todas naçiones seacojieran a ella y ellos
ayudara a defenderla, y fuera menester armar muy de proposito para
bolverse la a ganar, por ser el serviçio del puerto fuerte y de donde mas
daño pueden haçer a yslotas y costas que todo lo tiene a sotavento.

Lo segundo, que a este enemigo, que asta oy nadie lea echo resistençia en
la mar, aqui se le rompio la caveça, pues como esta dho, una de las dos
que governaban murio y 400 personas y hubo muchos heridos.

Lo 3, que se escaparon dos millones de plata y oro y granas con que la
Reyna podia armar y entretenerse por mas ynquietar nos.

Lo 4, que con averse entretenido en estas yslas asta los 3 de Diçiembre,
dio tiempo a que sepuedan aver prevenido los lugares sospechosos con los
avisos que esta dho sedespacharon a Sancto Domingo y a la avana, y destos
los avian tenido en Cartagena y nueba espana con que podemos esperar
seguridad.

Lo ultimo, y no demenos consideraçion es el animo y reputaçion que los
nuestros an cobrado, reconoçiendo el poco valor de los enemigos, y por el
contrario la opinion que ellos an perdido, en que consiste mucha parte
de los buenos o malos subçesos, y pues desta se siguen tantos viénes, su
Magestad debe haçer merced a los que en el se allaron para que los que
estan a la mira se animen a servirle en semeyantes ocasiones.

Pasada esta como esta dho, y aviendo el general tenido aviso que el
enemigo yba adelante, y que los vastimentos eran pocos por averse gastado
muchos en esta ocasion, y ser la miseria desta ysla tal que no se podian
proveer otros, y que combenia abreviar la partida de sudespacho, y ordeno
que con suma presteça se recojiese el artilleria de los puestos de tierra
y se embarcase la plata en los fragatas, y con ellas y con un navio y
un patache en que se embarco parte de la gente y artilleria de las dos
fragatas perdidas y de la capitana de tierra firme, partio de puerto rico
con buen tiempo a los 20 de Diçiembre de 1595.

    INSTRUCCION que dio Franᵒ. Draque, al capitan del navio
    Françes, uno de los de su armada que se le tomo en la ysla de
    Guadalupe.

    La instrucçion y orden que a de tener toda la armada que sale
    del puerto de Plemua desde 29 de Agosto de 1595 años.

    1. Primeramente es para servir a Dios y tener esta orden dos
    veçes aldia y sino fuese alguna ocasion no poder mas.

    2. Lo segundo aveis de tener gran cuidado de tener compania y
    venir a hablar a vuestro Almirante dos veçes aldia, y quando
    no pudieredes mas de una vez, lo haçed cada dia y tened gran
    cuidado de la orden que vos sera dada de guardarla y tener
    siempre estar en compania como el tiempo ordenare.

    3. Y si fuese algun navio o patache per tempestad de tiempo o
    per otra ocasion que hubiese y se apartase de la compania anos
    de allar primeramente en la ysla de Bayona de Galicia y alli
    estara la armada aguardando asta que el tiempo provea otra cosa
    y nos allareis, y de alli sino nos allaredes, yreis a Puerto
    Sancto y nos aguardareis alli tres dias, y sino fueremos alli,
    tomareis el camino para la ysla de Guadalupe, una ysla pequena
    de la vanda del nordeste çerca de la Dominica, en la qual
    estaremos tres dias y dejaremos alguna sinal para que sepais
    donde nosotros fueremos el qual sera para puerto rico; alli
    estaremos diez dias.

    4. Si en este camino tubieremos algun viento contrario e
    tempestad de noche, aveis de amaynar todas los belas asta la
    mañana, sino vieredes que una almiranta aga bela y ansi areis
    vosotros lo mismo.

    5. Y si el tiempo volviese de noche alguna contrariedad de
    vento contrario, vuestra almiranta pondra dos lanternas, una de
    vajo de otra de statura de un hombre, para que os vais regiendo
    por ellas.

    6. Y si todos nosotros amaynasemos de noche por alguna ocasion
    de tempestad y fuese neçesario haçer vela esa noche, aveis de
    ençender antes que nosotros echemos vela una sola lanterna con
    lumbre en popa y otra en la gavia del trinquete.

    7. No tendreis ninguna lumbre en ningun navio sino solamente
    la lumbre que estubiese en la aguia, y este con gran cuydado
    que no pareçia, fuera de la Almiranta y por los ocasiones que
    pueden venir del fuego, no aveis de traer ninguna candela ni
    lumbre entorno del navio sino fuese con lanterna, y ni mas ni
    menos aveis de tener gran cuidado con el fuego de la coçina.

    8. Ningun navio baral ni patache no vaya delante de la
    Almirante de noche y particularmente en tiempo de fortuna de
    tempestad ni se ponga de vajo de los navios grandes pasando de
    una parte a otra.

    9. Y si algun navio de la flota por desgraçia perdiese algun
    arbol mayor o verga o alguna bomba o otro aparejo alguno de
    importançia, tiraran una v dos pieças conforme a la necesitad
    que tubiese para que los otros navios le socorran con brevedad,
    y que ningun navio se aparte della asta que se socorra,
    conforme a la necesitad que se tubiese.

    10. Y si algun navio de la flota perdiese su curso y topase con
    otro algun navio, la señal sera que içaran y amaynaran la vela
    de gavia tres veçes y ansi ara la otra para que se conosca.

    11. No aveis de consentir jugar en el navio naypos ni dados por
    muchas ocasiones que suelen suçeder de pendençias.

    12. Aveis de tener grandissimo cuydado de conservar los
    bastimentos, conforme a vuestra discreçion asta que reçivais
    otra orden de lo que aveis de hacer.

    13. Lo ultimo para que agais mejor compañia, vereis una lumbre
    en la popa Almiranta una o dos veçes.

                                                     FRANᵒ. DRAQUE.


FOOTNOTES

[1] For hallado, as _Avana_ (above) for Havana, _an_ (lower down) for
han, _avito_ for habito, &c.

[2] This ought, probably, to be 3000.




AN ACCOUNT OF WHAT TOOK PLACE AT SAN JUAN DE PUERTO RICO, IN THE INDIES,
WITH THE ENGLISH FLEET UNDER THE COMMAND OF FRANCIS DRAKE AND JOHN
HAWKINS, ON THE 23RD NOVEMBER 1595.

(_The Translation of the preceding document._)


General Sancho Pardo y Osorio having taken his departure from the Havana
for Spain on the 10th March of this year, in command of the Capitana of
the main-land fleet, under convoy of the armed fleet of Don Francisco de
Coloma, and having, in the course of the gale which blew in the chops of
the Channel on the 15th of the same month, in latitude 23° 30´, found
himself without a main-mast, and with tiller broken, while the ship,
leaking much, and separated from the others, was no longer in a condition
to prosecute the voyage, for the purpose of saving the lives of the
three hundred people who were on board, as well as two millions of gold
and silver belonging to His Majesty and to private individuals; with
the advice and consent of the supercargo, Martin Vomero de Caamaño, and
of the pilots and other persons of most experience on board, made for
Puerto Rico, where he arrived, by a miracle, on the 9th April, and there
he landed the bullion, and deposited it in the fortress of the town.
The aforesaid general despatched immediately first and second advices
to His Majesty, making known his arrival, in order that instructions
might be sent to him as to what he should do. And it appears that Divine
Providence (to whom many thanks are due), for its secret ends, permitted
the orders, which might have come beforehand, to arrive just at the time
to save not only the bullion, but the island itself, and perhaps all the
Indies, as will be seen further on.

A few days after the aforesaid letters were despatched, the governor of
this island, Colonel Pedro Suares, received those of His Majesty, whereby
he was informed that a great fleet was fitting out in England for the
purpose of seizing on this island in the course of the winter, as it was
thought that at that season the inhabitants would be less upon their
guard. When the general and the aforesaid supercargo learned the contents
of these despatches, they joined in consultation with the governor and
Francisco Cid, captain of the infantry of this garrison; and having taken
into consideration and discussed the precautionary measures which ought
to be adopted for the safety of the place and of His Majesty’s treasure,
in order that, if the enemy should come, it might be out of his power to
make himself master of the whole, they all agreed on reconnoitering the
positions and accessible points from which the enemy might approach, so
as to throw people ashore; and also that the general should give orders
for planting some of the guns of his ship in the positions which he
judged best, and for laying the vessel athwart the channel of the port,
so that she might be sunk on the arrival of the enemy, and thus bar the
entrance; as this was the quarter where there seemed most likelihood of
attack and most risk, and where it was necessary to keep the people well
on the watch. These arrangements being made, the general remained in
expectation of His Majesty’s order to proceed on his voyage.

On the 13th November of this year, there arrived at this port, Don Pedro
Tello de Guzman, with the five frigates of His Majesty, in order that
General Sancho Pardo should embark in them His Majesty’s bullion, and
so proceed to Spain, the post of Admiral of his fleet being filled by
the aforesaid Pedro Tello, who, after having delivered his despatches,
related to the aforesaid general, how, coming here in the course of
his voyage, they had fallen in with two English ships at the island of
Guadaloupe, which had parted company from the English fleet; and how
his Admiral, Gonzalo Mendez de Canço, had captured one of them and sunk
her, after taking the Englishmen out of her; and that he, the aforesaid
Don Pedro, going in pursuit of the other vessel, discovered nine sail of
the enemy’s fleet, and as soon as he descried them he tacked about and
continued his voyage: and that the aforesaid English prisoners had stated
that thereabouts, on the southern side of the island of Guadaloupe, the
Queen of England’s fleet was lying at anchor and preparing launches;
that it consisted of five-and-twenty ships, six of them Queen’s galleons
of eight hundred tons burden, and two more of the same size belonging
to private parties, the whole being divided into two squadrons, having
for generals, Francis Drake and John Hawkins; the former, with his
lieutenant in command on shore, Sir Thomas Baskerville, directing the
course to be taken, and the proceedings on land; and that the armament
amounted to three thousand infantry and ten thousand five hundred seamen
well supplied with guns; and that they were coming direct to Puerto
Rico, as appeared also from the instructions which were taken from the
captain of the aforesaid English ship, in which he was ordered, in case
he should part company from the fleet by any mischance, to proceed to
Puerto Rico, where they would wait for him ten days, and after that,
would leave orders for him where he was to go, without further revealing
their intentions; and that in consequence of all this, the aforesaid Don
Pedro came, fearing that the enemy might have preceded him and already
got possession of the island; and since they had not yet come, he held
it for certain that they would be down upon the port the next day; and
accordingly it lay with the general to order his departure as it might
seem expedient.

When the general, Sancho Pardo, heard the statement made by the
aforesaid Don Pedro Tello and his admiral, Gonzalo Mendez; and inasmuch
as that news reached him when he was confined to his bed by an illness
under which he had been suffering some days, he sent word to the Bishop
and to the Governor, requesting them to come to him to meet the captains
of the frigates,—Marco Antonio Becerra, head of the company of fusileers;
and Pedro de Guia, of the order of St. John; and Domingo de Ynsaurraga;
Francisco Gomez, captain of this garrison; the supercargo, Martin Vomero
de Caamaño, and Juan de la Vera, purser of the frigates. These having all
met together in his house, the general laid before them and submitted
for their consideration the account which he had of the enemy, and the
best means that offered for the security of the island and the bullion,
supposing that the enemy’s fleet was as great, and to be expected as soon
as was said; and that the frigates absolutely required to have their
rigging repaired and to take in wood and water, which, with embarking the
bullion, would cause a delay of eight days at the least; and considering
that, whether they were so occupied or not, the enemy by reason of the
information which that other ship that was seen could give him, that
these frigates were coming for the treasure, which was now known to be
here, might hope to seize it on the passage, or to make himself master of
the country and to fortify himself in it, with a view to the conquest of
all the Indies, whence would ensue to His Majesty great injury and loss
of reputation.

All were of one mind in thinking that the place ought to be strengthened
with the guns and crews of the ships, and that the Capitana de Tierra
Firme and another ship belonging to Pedro Milanes, should be sunk in the
channel of the port, to shut the entrance, and that the bullion should
not be moved from the fort until it was seen what turn affairs would
take, as it appeared to be safer there, and in a position also, whence
(if, for our sins, it should be so ordered) it might be more easily
thrown into the sea, so that the enemy should not get it; and having thus
resolved, they proceeded to carry into execution with great alacrity and
zeal, night and day, every possible measure of defence.

General Sancho Pardo, as a person of great experience, and who had seen
and examined the position and approaches of the place, assured Don Pedro
Tello and the others who came with him, that the loss of the place was
out of the question if our people were only willing to fight and do their
duty, and that it was only necessary to take good care of the port, so as
to prevent the enemy’s fleet running into it at once; and that, for that
purpose, it were as well to sink the two ships which had been agreed on,
and on top of them, the frigates with their bows towards the sea to bar
the entrance, and that with this precaution the place was quite safe and
also the treasure of His Majesty, who, herein, would be well served, and
in whose name he called on them to attend to their several duties; and
accordingly Don Pedro Tello took under his own charge the defence of the
port.

The Bishop offered to say mass the next day, and to preach a sermon to
the people, as he did in fact, exhorting them, in a Christian manner,
to the service of God and of their king; and he persevered in the
performance of this office night and day, visiting the posts where the
people were stationed, placing a priest at each of them, and animating
his hearers with much zeal.

The same day, the governor and general despatched a barque with advices
to St. Domingo, that the inhabitants of that island might set and keep
themselves on the watch; so that if the enemy were to go there, as
was heard and was written to the President, the information might be
immediately forwarded to Cartagena and Sancta Maria.

All the people of the island were immediately mustered, and some of those
belonging to the frigates were landed, being thought necessary for the
defence of the posts. The whole amounted to ten thousand three hundred
souls, of whom seven hundred were fighting men, besides the eight hundred
belonging to the frigates and the Capitana of the main-land, and the rest
of the garrison, and foreigners, including, also, fifty on horseback with
lance and buckler; the whole of whom were distributed in the following
manner:

    In the curtain of the Morillo [battery], Captain Pedro de Guia,
      of the order of St. John, with a hundred and fifty soldiers     150

    In the curtain of the Cabron, Alonso de Vargas with a hundred
      soldiers                                                        100

    At the bridge and Boqueron, Ensign Pedro Vazquez with a hundred
      and fifty soldiers                                              150

    In the frigates, three hundred men under the command of Don
      Pedro Tello                                                     300

    At the mouth of the river Bayamon, Captain Otega with fifty
      soldiers                                                         50
                                                                      ---
                                                                      750

The rest of the people occupied the Morro and the esplanade, under the
command of Captain Marco Antonio de Veçerra and the governor, who led the
cavalry; each of them to advance with his party to whatever point seemed
to require his presence, or to stand in need of succour.

    ARTILLERY PLANTED.

    On the Morro [rock battery], twenty-seven very good brass guns     27

    On the platform of the other Morro, five pieces                     5

    In St. Helena, four pieces                                          4

    In the curtain of the Friars, close to the fortress, three pieces   3

    In the curtain of St. Catharine, five pieces                        5

    In the Tejar [tile field], nine pieces                              9

    At the mouth of the river, two pieces                               2

    On the bridge and in a ship which was placed there, six pieces      6

    On the Boqueron, four pieces                                        4

    On the Cabron curtain, two pieces                                   2

    On the curtain of the Morillo, three pieces                         3
                                                                      ---
                                                                       70

Besides the frigates well armed, without which there were the aforesaid
seventy pieces of cannon planted with good gunners at each post, and for
chief commander of the forts of the Morro and the Morillo de Sta. Helena,
the Admiral, Gonçalo Mendez de Canço.

On the 15th of the same month intelligence arrived from the governor of
Canary, despatched to the governor of this island, to make it known that
the enemy’s fleet had passed by the former place, and having landed some
people for the purpose of watering, they had been forced to retreat with
the loss of five-and-twenty men, and had gone off towards the Indies; and
the same messenger stated, that in passing by the island of St. Martin,
he had seen the armada, of five-and-twenty sail, lying at anchor.

Immediately, on the same day, the general, Sancho Pardo, sent the same
despatch to the governor of the Havana, and wrote to him to forward the
information to New Spain to General Pedro Melendez, who was on that coast
with his fleet. These precautionary steps having been taken, and the
people being all eager to combat the enemy, the general held a council,
at which were present, Don Pedro Tello; the admiral, Gonçalo Mendez;
and the captains, Marco Antonio Veçerra, Pedro de Guia, and Domingo de
Ynsaurraga, with the supercargo Martin Vomero de Caamaño; and having
taken into consideration whether it were expedient to embark the bullion
in two of the frigates, so that if the enemy should place himself before
the port, these being lighter, might effect their escape by night, the
other three following them in the rear, in order that, if any attempt
were made upon them, they might stay behind fighting while the two
continued their voyage; it was decided by the majority of votes, that
the bullion should not be removed from the place where it was lying,
because the removal of it would tend to dispirit the people, who were
fired with the thought of defending it: seeing their expectations foiled,
they would be dispirited, and His Majesty would lose the place and his
reputation, which was to be valued much more highly than the bullion:
and what it behoved them to do, was to face the enemy, trusting in God
for the victory. When the general saw how the majority inclined, he gave
orders to Don Pedro Tello to get the frigates ready with all convenient
despatch, that the bullion might be embarked whenever it was found
expedient to do so; the enemy, it was supposed, would afford indications
of his intentions, if he had such, of watching for it outside; and he
directed that a caravel should cruise on the look out, about fifty
leagues off the land. This was done accordingly, and the bullion remained
as it was, which was the prudent course.

Wednesday the 22nd of the same month (November), at break of day, the
enemy’s fleet was descried on the horizon, with twenty-three sail and a
pinnace. The six queen’s galleons of eight hundred tons, and two ships
of the same size, and the rest, vessels of three hundred tons and of one
hundred and fifty and less, and forty launches, came sailing in close
order. Immediately every one snatched up his arms and ran to his post
with great alacrity, and well disposed for combat. There was but little
wind, and so the fleet advanced but slowly till it entered the breeze.
The pinnace came first and some boats with white signal-flags sounding
the coast. One of them having come in front of the Boqueron battery, a
gun was fired at it which made it stand off to sea, and they immediately
hoisted other coloured flags and passed out; and in the afternoon the
whole fleet came and cast anchor in front of the curtain of the Cabron,
where no one had ever seen a ship ride before, nor was it known that
there was good anchorage till after the departure of the enemy, when the
general sent to have the place sounded, and from twenty to thirty fathoms
clear water were found there. From what was learned, it appears to have
been his intention to land a force under the fire of his artillery,
imagining that he should find us unprepared, and seeing no reason to
believe that such a step would meet with resistance; wherein he was
mistaken.

The fleet having arrived in the place above-mentioned, our people fired
at it several pieces of artillery from the Morrillo and the curtain of
the Cabron, so that some of the shot took effect on them, for it was
known afterwards, that they killed John Hawkins, the general of one of
the squadrons, and two of the principal gentlemen who accompanied him,
besides other people; and that they carried away the table at which
Francis Drake was eating, the ball striking a gentleman who was with him,
and who, it is known, will not escape.

The enemy perceiving how much loss he sustained from the shore, sent the
pinnace with a pilot, a native of the islands and a mulatto by race, who
is said to be practically well acquainted with these coasts, with five
boats to the port, to reconnoitre it and to sound close to the mouth
formed by the islet, which is called Goat Island, which lies towards the
west; and when it was sounded, one of the boats returned with information
to the fleet, which immediately weighed anchor, at five o’clock in the
evening, without having fired a cannon or even a musket during all the
whole time that it was there, and ran out to sea, where it stood off and
on that night till the following day.

Thursday following, at eight o’clock in the morning, the whole fleet came
and anchored on the windward side of the small island where they had
been sounding the day before, close to the port; and this was another
new anchorage not known hitherto, and having six fathoms over shoals,
where a vessel might be easily lost in any bad weather. There the fleet
anchored, the weather being favourable, and beyond the reach of our
artillery; and the same evening two boats were sent to sound the shore
by the river Bayamon as far as the Carivelo stockade, and to examine
these shoals in order to see if it were possible to land a force in that
quarter; and in one of the boats, which was covered closely with an
awning, was Francis Drake, as was subsequently learned.

When Don Pedro Tello, who had charge of the port, saw the pains the enemy
was taking, and perceived that an attack was about to be made that very
night on the stockade of the Carivelo, by forcing it with boats, so as
to land a body of men, he sent to the general to acquaint him with what
was going on, and to ask for a reinforcement to resist such an attempt;
and the general ordered that in the evening Captain Augustin de Candecho
should proceed thither with thirty soldiers, and that at night there
should be fifty soldiers under the command of the supercargo, Martin
Vomero de Caamaño, with orders that if the enemy’s force should prove
superior, he should retreat with his men in boats to the frigates, in
which their forces were to be concentrated.

The same Thursday, 23rd, St. Clement’s day, at ten o’clock at night,
when it was quite dark, the enemy commenced an attack on the port with
twenty-five boats, each carrying fifty or sixty men well armed, with
the view of burning the frigates, as was afterwards seen, and they
all entered close up to the platform of the Rock [battery], ranging
themselves under the fire of the artillery; and from what was learned
afterwards, it appears that Francis Drake came in one of them to the
mouth of the port to place the rest. Dark as it was, the boats were
seen, and instantly the guns from the Rock and from the fort of Sta.
Helena began to play as briskly as possible. Most of the boats attacked
the Capitana, the Texeda frigate, setting fire to her at the bow, and
throwing into her a quantity of fire-pots and shells, while ours
succeeded in extinguishing the flames before they had done any damage,
the fight being carried on with cannon, musquetry, and stones.

At the same time they set fire to the Sta. Ysabel and Magdalena frigates,
and to the Sancta Clara, which was extinguished; but the third time that
the Magdalena frigate, of which Domingo de Ynsaurraga was captain, took
fire, it was impossible to extinguish the flames, as the ship took fire
at the stern and burned furiously; and all that could be done to maintain
a footing on board, was done by the aforesaid captain and the people with
him, until the ship was just burnt down and twelve men were killed by the
enemy’s musquetry, besides as many more burnt. And the aforesaid captain
made his escape by swimming through the midst of the boats and reached
the frigate Sancta Ysabel, which was under the command of Captain Juan
Flores de Rabanal in place of Captain Pedro de Guia, who had charge of a
post on land, and there he lent his assistance in every manner possible.
The battle lasted for an hour, the most obstinately contested that was
ever seen, and the whole port was illumined by the burning frigate in a
manner favourable for the rest, who could thus see to point our artillery
and that of the forts, with which, and with the musquetry and the stones
thrown from the frigate, they did such effect, that the enemy, after
about an hour, during which the combat lasted, as I have said, retreated
with the loss of nine or ten boats and more than four hundred men,
besides many more wounded; while on our side, the only loss was that of
the frigate and forty men killed or burnt, besides a few wounded by the
musquetry. It was a fine sight to see how the frigates fought, and how
capitally they were backed by the artillery of the forts, particularly
that of Sta. Helena, which was in an advantageous position for playing on
the boats.

Friday 24th. Considering that the enemy would assuredly repeat his
attack at night, and endeavour to land his forces, the people on our side
never ceased, from the dawn of day, to prepare for resistance, planting
cannon at some passes on land, as was done, for example, in the whole of
the Tejar, where the governor commanded, with Captain Marco Antonio and
the people forming the company of guards. Captain Guia, who previously
kept guard in the Morrillo, now took his station in the curtain of Sancta
Catalina with fifty arquebusseers; in the curtain of the Friars, close
to the fortress, were two other pieces with thirty soldiers, under the
command of the supercargo, Martin Vomero, and on every side numerous
trenches were dug and defences constructed, every one working spade in
hand, and not a single negro to assist, for the people round about had
sent off all their slaves to the mountain, with their effects and women,
as soon as the enemy appeared.

However, about eight o’clock in the morning, as soon as the land breeze
sprang up, the enemy’s fleet weighed and stood to sea, endeavouring to
get to windward of the port, and continued on this course till evening;
and Don Pedro Tello perceiving that the object was to run at once into
the port, went ashore to explain to the general his apprehension that the
enemy was about to bear down directly on the place: that the two ships
which had been already sunk did not completely close up the entrance to
it, and that it was expedient to sink two frigates in the part that still
remained open, inasmuch as the complete barring of the entrance and the
security of the port were quite as important as the two frigates, for
many reasons, and for the good of His Majesty’s service.

General Sancho Pardo immediately held a council with the governor and
other officers, and they decided that one frigate should be sunk in the
channel, in case that a ship belonging to Pedro Sedeño, which was lying
there laden with merchandise, and another of less size, should prove
insufficient; that these should be sunk immediately, just as they were,
as there was not time to unload them, and that the frigate should be sunk
whenever Don Pedro thought proper.

At four o’clock in the afternoon the enemy came running down with the
breeze towards the port, and Don Pedro Tello, believing that he was
making directly for it, sank the two vessels of Sedeño and Juan Diaz de
Sancta Aña, and also the Texeda frigate, without being able, owing to
the short time allowed, to take out of them all the provisions and guns,
although a part was saved; and thus the entrance of the channel was
completely closed, and about vesper time the enemy came to anchor between
the Rock and Goat island, where he had lain at anchor the night before.

The circumstance that the fleet anchored, and nearer than before to the
port, tended to confirm the suspicion that the enemy meant to attempt
that very night to finish the burning of the frigates, and to land
people. Don Pedro Tello, therefore, with the consent of the governor,
had the three frigates brought back to the interior of the port, and
they were placed in the Tejar with a guard to secure them; but he had no
fears about the landing of a force, seeing the spirit which animated our
people, and that all the posts and landing-places were well entrenched
and strengthened. The removal of the frigates took place at night,
when the enemy could see nothing, and consequently the next morning he
concluded that they had been all sunk. The night passed off quietly,
without any effort on our part to shew that we were well on the watch.

Saturday the 25th, as soon as daylight appeared, the enemy sent seven
or eight boats to reconnoitre the port, and all the shore as far as the
Boqueron. These kept at a distance from land, beyond the reach of our
guns; and about ten o’clock they returned to the fleet, which remained at
anchor in the place above-mentioned.

The same day, about two o’clock in the afternoon, our caravel, which had
gone to look out for the enemy eight days before, came in sight, and as
soon as it was seen by our people, they fired a gun from the Boqueron
to warn it to bear up without approaching the port; and some boats from
the fleet followed it as far as the Playa de Cangrejos (crab ground),
where it ran ashore, and part of the cavalry hastened forward to assist
the crew; and Francisco Gonçalez, who was the pilot and captain of the
caravel, scuttled her, to prevent the enemy’s carrying her off; and so
the boats went away, and returned to the fleet without making a prize.

The same Saturday, at night, the whole fleet made sail without being
seen, and stood out to sea; and when we found in the morning that it
had disappeared, people were sent by land westwards along the coast to
ascertain whether it was seen or had passed that way, as was supposed,
and was going to St. Domingo.

On Monday news arrived from Arracibo, fourteen leagues from this port,
that the fleet had passed by on its course. The same day the general
despatched another messenger to San German, who returned within six days
with the information that the enemy’s fleet was lying in the Butiro de
la Azucar on the other side of San German, and that they had landed five
companies of pikemen and musqueteers, who were collecting supplies of
meat, wood, and water, and made four boats in as many days to carry their
supplies.

The general having received this intelligence, and thinking it likely
that there might be some artifice in the enemy’s movements, who perhaps
might be lying in wait hoping to catch the two frigates, or intending to
return upon Puerto Rico when they should be gone and the place weakened,
in order that he might seize it, and execute his design of fortifying
himself in it, seriously deliberated as to what should be done, and
determined that the frigates should not quit the port till it was known
for certain that the enemy had passed Point de la Aguada; and that
Captain Juan Flores de Rabanal should go seventy or eighty leagues to the
north with a patache to look out, while the bullion was in the meantime
embarking. In eight days he returned, without having seen anything.

The 9th of December intelligence was brought from San German that the
enemy’s fleet had gone away southwards.

On the 11th of the same month there arrived at this place Lope Sanchez,
boatswain of the Magdalena frigate, and four seamen of the same, who had
been taken in the water by the enemy’s boats, the night the frigates
were set on fire. These men had been put on shore in the Butiro de la
Azucar, with a letter of Francis Drake to the governor here, of which the
following is a copy:—

    Letter of FRANCIS DRAKE to Colonel PEDRO SUAREZ, Governor of
    Puerto Rico.

    “Understanding that your lordship is a gentleman of rank and
    a soldier, I write this letter to give you to understand that
    whenever I have had an opportunity of dealing with the Spanish
    nation, I have treated it with much honour and clemency,
    liberating the individuals belonging to it, not a few, but
    many in number. So, at the time when our people set fire to
    the frigates, certain Spaniards were saved from the fury of
    the flames, who, as conquered enemies, experienced from us no
    ill-treatment, but the usage of honourable war.

    “From them it has been learned that the capitana of Don Pedro
    Tello took a small vessel of our fleet, having on board
    twenty-five Englishmen, or more, treating them well, and as
    might be expected in fair war. I myself still cherish my
    former sentiments; but having another affair, strong deeds are
    done, which never entered my mind. But as there are in this
    place soldiers and gentlemen, I have no doubt that my people
    will fare well, and will obtain their liberty for the sake of
    honourable war: this I hope, and shall do the like myself. I
    remain at your lordship’s service in all things, bating the
    cause which is to be maintained as that of the flag of her
    sacred Majesty the queen of England.

                                                    “FRANCIS DRAKE.

    “The 23d November 1595, English style.”

From the information given by the aforesaid boatswain and the other
seamen, who had gone with the enemy for eight days, it was ascertained
that the latter had departed thence towards the S. or S.S.W., and that
they were going to St. Domingo and thence to Panama, for they said that
they were going where there was a quantity of gold and silver; and the
same thing might also be inferred from the number of boats they took with
them for an armament.

These men confirmed also the death of John Hawkins, and testified as to
the regret occasioned thereby, as well as to the heavy loss which the
enemy sustained. Thus, as a boat was passing one day from the flag-ship
to one of the other galleons, it was struck, and nearly every man in it
was wounded. They stated that the enemy complained much of the damage
done by the stones thrown from the frigates; and that the loss was so
great, that when Francis Drake held a council the day after the battle,
to determine whether they should renew the attack, there was not one who
agreed with him in favour of that proposition, especially as these men
had told them that our force was much greater than it used to be; and
that Drake was amazed when he learned how few people were on board of the
frigates the night of the fire, and plucked his beard [with vexation] for
not having taken the treasure and the place, not letting himself be seen
those two days; complaining of John Hawkins, who did not allow them to
pursue the three frigates from the island of Guadaloupe, as soon as it
was known that they had taken the vessel and were making for Puerto Rico;
intimating that in that case we should not have had the opportunity of
fortifying the place, as was done in the eight days which they spent in
the delay of preparing boats, and watering.

All this has been so ordered by God, to whom we owe many thanks, since
by His means, besides obtaining such a victory, with so small a force as
that which on our side resisted the efforts of so powerful an armament,
in defence of the place and two millions of treasure, important services
have resulted to his Majesty, and a general gain to private individuals.

In the first place, as far as can be learned, it was the enemy’s
intention to maintain this force, which he might easily do at small cost,
for the pirates of all nations who frequent these seas, would gather
about him, and would aid him in defending the position; and it would then
be necessary to fit out an expedition expressly to retake the place,
since the port has a decided advantage, and from thence much injury may
be easily done to the islands and coasts which are to leeward.

In the second place, this enemy, who up to this time has never met with
any resistance at sea, has here had his head broken; since, as has been
related, one of the two leaders died, with four hundred of his followers,
and a great many were wounded.

Thirdly, we have thus saved two millions worth of gold, silver, and
cochineal, with which the queen might equip and maintain a force to give
us further trouble.

Fourthly, the delaying of the enemy in these islands till the 3rd
December, allowed time for warning those places for the safety of which
fears might be entertained, by means of the despatches which were sent,
as has been stated, to St. Domingo and the Havana, whence others were
forwarded to Carthagena and New Spain, so that we may now hope that all
is safe.

The last, and not the least consideration, is, the spirit which our
people have shewn, and the renown which they have won, proving the
inferiority of the enemy; and, on the other hand, the hold on opinion
which the latter have lost, and in which consists to a great extent the
secret of good or ill-success. And since the beneficial results of this
affair are so many, his Majesty ought to return thanks to those who took
part in it, in order that the lookers-on may be encouraged to serve him
on like occasions.

This affair having passed over as here related, and the general having
received information that the enemy was gone on, and that provisions were
scarce, a quantity of them having been lost on this occasion, and the
poverty of the island being such that the deficiency could not be made
good, and that it was necessary for him to abridge his delay as much as
possible, gave orders to collect the guns with the utmost despatch from
the several posts on land, and to embark the treasure in the frigates;
and with these, one ship, and a patache, in which were embarked part of
the crews and artillery of the two lost frigates, he left Puerto Rico
with good weather on the 20th December 1595.

    The Instructions given by F. Drake to the captain of the
    Francis, one of the vessels of his fleet, which was taken at
    the island of Guadaloupe.

    The Instruction and Order to be observed by the whole fleet,
    which departs from the port of Plymouth on the 29th August 1595.

    1. In the first place, omit not divine worship, and let this
    order be observed twice a-day, unless no opportunity offers.

    2. Secondly, great care must be taken to keep company and to
    come to speak with your admiral twice a-day; and if you cannot
    do it more than once, yet let it be done every day; and take
    great care to observe every order given you, and to be always
    in company, as the weather shall allow.

    3. And should it happen that any ship or small vessel, through
    stress of weather or other cause that may be, parts company,
    they must look for us first of all in the island of Bayona, on
    the coast of Galicia, and the fleet will wait till it is time
    to proceed and you shall have found us; and thence, if you
    should not find us, you shall go to Puerto Sancto, and there
    you shall wait for us three days; and should we not be there,
    you shall make for the island of Guadaloupe (a small island
    near Dominica towards the north-east), where we will stay three
    days, and will leave some signal that you may know what course
    we shall have taken, which shall be for Puerto Rico; there we
    will stay ten days.

    4. If in the course of this voyage you meet with any foul
    wind or bad weather, you must take in all sail at night till
    morning, unless you see that one of your admirals carries sail,
    in which case you shall do the same.

    5. And if foul wind or bad weather should come on at night,
    your admiral will hang out two lanterns, one above the other,
    and the height of a man asunder, that you may steer by them.

    6. And if we should all shorten sail over night on account of
    the weather, and it be necessary to make sail the same night,
    you must show, before we make sail, a single lantern with a
    light at the bow, and another at the fore-top.

    7. You shall keep no light in any of the ships, but only the
    light in the binocle, and this with the greatest care that it
    be not seen, excepting the admiral’s ship; and to avoid the
    danger of fire, you must not bear about any candle or light in
    the ship, unless in a lantern; and neither more nor less, you
    must take the greatest care with the fire in the galley.

    8. No vessel, square or cutter-rigged, should go ahead of the
    admiral at night, particularly in rough weather; or get under
    the lee of large vessels, in tacking from side to side.

    9. And if any vessel of the fleet should lose, through
    mischance, a main-mast, or yard, or any of the water vessels,
    or anything else of importance, they shall fire one or two
    shots, according to the necessity of the case, that the other
    vessels may afford them speedy assistance; and take care that
    no vessel quit that which is in distress till the required
    succour be given.

    10. Should any vessel of the fleet lose her course, and fall
    in with another of the fleet, the signal shall be to hoist and
    lower topsails three times; and the other vessel shall do the
    same for recognition.

    11. You must not permit any gambling in the ship, with cards or
    dice, by reason of the numerous quarrels usually resulting from
    that practice.

    12. You must take the greatest care to save the provisions,
    following your own discretion in this matter till you receive
    another order for your guidance.

    13. Finally, in order that you may be better able to keep
    company, you shall see a light at the admiral’s stern once or
    twice.

                                                     FRANCIS DRAKE.

FINIS.

RICHARDS, PRINTER, 100, ST. MARTIN’S LANE.